You board.
We represent the Nelson Tasman Climate Forum,
an Independent Climate Act action organization
of about 150 volunteers working
with local communities across Nelson, Tasman and Golden Bay.
The thrust of our presentation today is
for the Fast Track Amendment Act to achieve better outcomes
through the independent expert panels as decision makers.
The professional approach of the EPA
and panel convenience, which is as described in the panel,
convenience practice and procedure guidance document
and active input from affected persons.
And we are concerned that the Amendment Bill threatens to
borrow the Parliamentary Commission for the Environment
Acts expression, uh, words to toed these.
In fact, the bill ignores strong global evidence that
to get value from a major project,
it is essential from the outset
that they have quality appraisal time
and effective leadership.
This is vital for projects that have high emissions and
or impacts on the, on the natural environment,
which are our greatest concern, such as mining highways
and waste incineration,
The, uh, Sams Creek project near to where I live
and mining in general, we are concerned
that this bill will make it easier
for undesirable mining to be undertaken.
Mining is necessary,
but it also contributes to climate change
by general grazing, uh, greenhouse gas emissions in the work
of site preparation, extraction,
transportation, and in the coal.
In the case of coal combustion
before Pike River, we assumed that bad
practice mining only occurred elsewhere at Pike River.
We discovered that New Zealand had insufficient oversight
and expertise in managing risks of underground mining
and that, uh, fast track thinking contributed
to this disaster.
Our forum represents communities down river from Sams Creek,
including Coral Poo Springs.
Arsenic is a problem
and, uh, um, tailings Dems are not
built to last forever.
They may fail after one year
or when the alpine forward goes, or in 500 years.
Either way, that is unacceptable.
We are also monitoring Bathhurst Bathhurst resources
who have announced mine plans for the unique
and precious ecosystems on the, uh, Dennis
and Plateau, another fast track project
that would override conservation objections.
We are concerned this Fast Track amendment bill will
effectively reduce proper scrutiny
and management of mining due
to its potential environmental impacts.
Mining needs more oversight, not less.
We make five key recommendations for your consideration.
Firstly, we recommend using this amendment bill
to exclude mining from fast tracking.
This is not prejudice.
We want the act to work well,
but we think that continued inclusion is a big problem
where mining is clearly
of substantial benefit to New Zealand.
It doesn't need fast tracking.
The current inclusion of mines unnecessarily distracts from
the core purpose of this act, which are develop,
which are developmental and can,
and can add increasing value.
Mines are essentially transactional.
They use non-renewable resources,
which are currently sold abroad without any value added to.
New Zealand Mines themselves are also readily priced
and sold abroad with no value added.
As we saw recently at Ton
Mines have a unique set of complex impacts,
which make them very uncivil for fast track assessments.
Our second point is to ask you to consider
changing clause five to focus on use
of cost benefit analysis.
And we, uh, of course are not the only submitted on this
point, but we thought we would add our voice.
Cost benefit is the most robust
and generally accepted procedure internationally
for assessing project value.
Clause five. Instead,
proposes using government policy statements
to state relevant benefits, including so-called
regional benefits, which are hard
for central government to define.
If clause five is to be retained,
we recommend it specifically
require independent cost benefit analysis, including
tel costs and benefits.
Because this would provide proper discipline on project
choice and is widely respected as a tool.
Internationally, government policy statements should not,
in our view, be used as a project prioritization
and selection tool by ministers
as this would compromise independent decision making
by the expert panels.
So our third point is to ask you to not proceed
with proposed reduced timeframes for consultation
and substantive decision making by panels, we refer
to clause nine of the bill, which amends section 17 six
of just 15 days,
and to clause 44, which amends 79 2 B
to limit panel assessments to 60 days.
This compression increases the risk of errors
and emissions in the process, particularly
for social environmental outcomes and for complex projects.
The existing discretion of the fourth panel convener
to set a probate timeframes
for substantial decisions should be retained.
Our fourth point is to invite you to set a materiality
threshold to clause 44 in order
to discourage modification creep.
As you'll be aware, modification creep is a critical issue
in most infrastructure and energy projects.
Clause 42 introduces new section
68 A and B to the act.
The current wording establishes this wording establishes a
so-called moral hazard
for government in essentially allowing post-project approval
to be obtained for extensive modifications.
Here we saw this moral hazard act out pretty dramatically in
the Yme Dam with a 300%, 300% budget blowout,
which we are now all paying for in the coming decades.
It's a common, it's a common global problem
for all large projects internationally.
And here in AO is best addressed
by comprehensive prior planning, not redesign on the truck
as provided for in clause 42.
We ask you also to please consider deleting clause 33 2
to avoid weakening the role of local government authorities.
As you know, councils play a critical role in generating
community buy-in for all major developments.
We, like many others, work closely
with our elected cloud source.
Clause 33, 2 introduces a new section 52 A to the act,
which would significantly constrain this mechanism
for fast track and set an undesirable precedent
for local government leadership on other major projects
where government is asking council to lead such
as local waters.
Well done. This will be a problem if 33 2
is treated as it's proposed.
Thank you.
Thank you. And we hopefully
we've got a little bit of time for questions.
Yeah, we've got time for one question.
Thank you very much for your submission,
and I'll hand it over to Lan Farm who had her hand up first.
Thank you,
Koto, thank you so much for your very clear
and comprehensive submission.
Um, top of the south, it's known for its natural beauty,
including three of your national parks
and, you know, mining
and tourism, which is associated with
that natural beauty is not always, uh,
cannot always exist hand in hand.
What can you expand for us about the region
and the provisions in this bill as to whether
that would actually allow that, those, I guess,
an assessment of those trade-offs
for one industry over another?
I'll start off. I so, uh, this is the, the bill.
This is an opportunity here.
This is a complicated topic, uh,
how one industry might impact another
and what we as a country should prioritize
and what we should have a strategy is.
And, um, uh,
because if we don't do this, we might end up
with bad really bad decisions,
which we would be permanently regretting.
So one well known example, everyone in this com,
your committee know, is how we are support.
We've supported radiata pine even on steep hillsides,
which is providing hugely costly
for nearby grassland farms.
And right here where we are for house
and homes in Emoto Valley, radiata Pine in the wrong place,
a forestry industry confronting an agricultural industry
and a home settlements.
So turning to tourism reputation is everything in tourism,
reputation is everything.
So stories about well face stories about mine, trucks,
tailgating on narrow roads
and explosions at the top of the hill
behind us would not be good for our reputation.
So we think need to think carefully about the interactions
between mining and tourism.
Big questions. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much. We have met time today.
We appreciate you all coming this afternoon, um,
and submitting your thoughts and insights and analysis.
So thank you very much for your time
And thank you for considering our submission.
So we'll now move on to our next submission,
which is Summerset Group Holdings Limited.
Good afternoon, Aaron. We can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you.
Thank you, uh, Koto. Thanks.
Thanks for the opportunity to present.
Uh, I am Aaron Smail from Somerset,
where I've been the Chief development officer of,
uh, more than 10 years.
We, uh, new Zealand's largest retirement village developer
and operated by market cap.
We've got 43 villages either completed
or in development, more than 9,000 residents,
and we spend up to half a billion dollars a year
on residential development.
So we are deeply invested in the effectiveness
of our resource management system.
We support the intention of the Bills amendments
and are pleased that they aim
to make the fast track process faster and more predictable.
However, to ensure that they have their intended effect,
we wish to highlight several key points.
First one being infrastructure conditions.
Uh, retirement village companies
have a heavy reliance on CCOs and utility companies
because we often need to build in greenfield's areas.
So we do support the addition of infrastructure conditions
to bind third party providers,
but we ask that this be clarified to
avoid inadvertently creating new hurdles
to timely development.
We submit that the infrastructure conditions should be
imposed on both the infrastructure providers
and the applicants, and we've suggested wording
that would obligate those infrastructure providers
to provide their infrastructure within an
appropriate timeframe.
Secondly, in regard to panel appointment timelines,
we are concerned that the imposition
of tight 15 day working periods, working day periods
for panel appointments risks compromising the quality
of panels panel and therefore the timeliness
and robustness of decisions they make.
It's really crucial that panelists have extensive
and relevant experience.
So if you do keep that provision, we recommend allowing
for extensions where when suitable panel members have not
yet been found, and we recommend clarifying statutory
triggers for the panel setup to avoid unnecessary delays.
In regard to your
or the minister's referral decisions, we would like to see
a 16, sorry, a 66 0
working day statutory timeframe
for the minister's referral decisions as
that's perhaps the part of the process
that currently has the least certainty.
So that's the minister making their
referral decision within 60 days.
Our next, I'll move on
to the limitations on invited comments.
As applicants,
we generally support the limitations being put on
who can comment on an application,
and we understand its intention to streamline approvals.
However, we caution in our lawyers' caution
that this may increase the risk of collateral litigation.
So we'd like the committee
to consider whether this amendment will actually
achieve its purpose
or whether it might inadvertently create new legal risks.
Moving on to requests for information.
So, uh,
allowing further information requests at the completeness
check stage now is positive.
That's good. Rather than having the applications summarily
re returned if they are deemed incomplete.
However we caution about this
or against this becoming a generator of unreasonable
or excessive information demands at that early stage,
the checker should be checking for completeness
that all the basis of information
provision have been covered.
But it is the subsequent panel's job
and not the checker's job to ask
for any more in-depth information as the panel sees fit.
For example, it should not be a completeness checkers role
to request full draft management plans prematurely.
Who knows? The panel may not have required
that economic assessment.
We support the consideration of government policy
as statements when assessing applications,
and we always submit economic impact assessments
that detail our projects, national or regional benefits,
but we seek clarity that the next level full on
cost benefit analysis should not be required
for all projects as this as often impractical
and efficient and unwarranted.
For fast track developments, for example,
it's widely recognized
that quality large scale retirement villages
are very much easy decisions when it comes to
regarding their economic benefits, um,
regional national significance.
So the criteria for determining regional
or national significance in section 22
is good, that's valuable.
Um, but we recommend clarifying that these criteria
apply at the substantive application stage
of the process too, and not just the referral stage.
There are other technicalities
and drafting suggestions in our submission
that I will not go into now regarding lapse periods,
the lack of transitional provisions
and clarification needed on an applicant's ability to lodge
before the 20 day pre lodged consultation period elapses,
that's detail in our submission.
In closing, Somerset is committed
to developing when delivering high quality retirement living
for our growing hourly population
and an effective, efficient, predictable,
and robust fast track system as essential for us
to achieve that.
We urge the committee to consider our recommendations
to ensure this bill delivers on its promise
of streamlining development while maintaining the quality
and integrity of decision making and resource management.
So thank you for your time and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Aaron.
Um, some interesting insights there
and into obviously retirement villages.
Um, look, I might take the opportunity
to ask the first question here.
Could you give some examples perhaps of retirement villages,
you know, where they have taken a very long time
through the process
and perhaps, um, projects that you maybe got the vision to,
uh, build right now that, you know, you, you see as,
as tough because you've got the challenges
of the resource management system.
I I can, it's your question in regard to the sort
of traditional RMA and how long that might take or
Yeah, yeah, I'd be just yeah.
Interested in then perhaps any that you've got obviously in,
in the fast track.
Yep. Um, so we've just opened a big village in St.
John's Auckland.
It's about $450 million project that took 10 years
from the point of acquisition to, to opening a village.
We have another one in, uh, lower Hut,
which has taken nine years, um, to go from, uh, purchase
and uh, to, to actually delivering the village.
So, um, where there is a lot of, uh,
community opposition, um,
and parties that are willing to go go the distance with the,
you know, with the environment court, that,
that it has been tricky.
Um, we used the COVID-19 Act on three
village, uh, developments.
That was, that was a real, uh, step forward.
Um, but,
but progressively they did start, uh, reverting more
to type in terms of the, the panel's, uh, behavior and,
and the, the quantum of information they needed,
the quality of the panelists.
So, um, I personally think this
Fast Track approvals act does deal with much of the, many
of the issues that we're starting to creep in, if you like.
Mm. Um, and hold, hold, hold sort of, yeah, we've got one,
one project in the FTAA Schedule two,
but we haven't, we haven't, uh, gone
through the full fast track approvals act process yet.
And, uh, obviously with an aging population
and more demand, uh, for I suppose retirement villages, uh,
are you finding that there is, is the demand there
and obviously 10 years is, is a long time for those
to actually come on board?
Yeah, demand is definitely there.
The demographics don't lie that the, the, you know,
the baby boomer demographic bubbles coming through,
so there will be really, really good demand for the next 15,
20 years at least.
Um, and, and you know, we're in the fortunate position
where we can, we have the resources to deal with those
long battles, but the smaller operators obviously seems
tricky, tricky for them to
navigate their way through the RMA.
Thank you look, uh, question from Elia Wade Brown.
Good afternoon. Thank you for, um, coming
and giving us your viewpoints.
I was just interested in your quite strong insistence
that retirement villages are well placed in
greenfield's developments.
Um, I think one of the most successful ones
I've seen is the one in Kilburn, right?
So that, um, residents who are able to, can easily get out
to, uh, out of the actual precinct
and visitors are very easily able
to see their family or friends.
And I just wonder whether the loosening
of consideration of infrastructure, um, we tend to think
of the three waters,
but also transport, um, including walking
and public transport, particularly relevant for the elderly.
Um, would these
be bypassed in the consideration, um,
if we go down this route?
Uh, thank you for that question.
We really intend
to develop in those built up areas first, first
and foremost, we, we want to be building in the kil burns
where the social infrastructure is around there,
but, um, we're needing to ba build at such a scale now to,
um, make the villages economic
that there's no longer those large parcels
of land in those densely populated areas.
So we are forced to, um, move out as you know, with,
with the subdivisions often in order
to find larger parcels of land.
Hmm. Look, thank you very much Aaron.
We have met time this afternoon, uh, really
interesting submissions, so thank you.
Thank you.
Right. We will now move on to our next submitter
who is Myland Partners New Zealand Limited.
Hello. Hello. We can see you and hear you.
Uh, thank you for joining us this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Um, I'm Madeline Wright.
I'm legal council for my land
partners, uh, New Zealand Limited.
Whose submission you are considering.
Um, with me is Andrew Fset, who's the director of my land,
uh, also the director of Vine Way Limited mine.
My land is the parent company for Vine Way
and Vine Way is one of the, uh, authorized persons referred
to and schedule two of the Fast Track Act
and that's the project.
Um, I'm just gonna take a couple of minutes today
and leave as much time for questions as as possible.
Um, my land submission supports the amendment bill,
but it does seek some changes
and make some recommendations
for additions that could be made.
All of the recommendations that have been put forward,
they're conceptually of the same nature as the changes
that are made in the bill itself.
So that's focused on the mechanics, uh,
uh, mechanics of the process.
And then also on clarifying the, um,
statutory intent within the initial act.
There are a number of changes that are being put forward,
um, and I think those can really be grouped under
three propositions.
And so I'm just gonna note those propositions as opposed
to going through the detail, the changes,
and then happy to take questions on those.
So the first, uh,
and this is somewhat echoing the submission that, uh,
you've all just heard, but is
that local authority Monomania
with their own urban development sequencing should not
prevent fast track projects going ahead
or force fast track projects to create extensive
and extensive onsite infrastructure when there is capacity
in the existing network to support that project.
So the Fast Track process project,
the fast track process was intended
to deliver projects ahead of time
and ahead of when they might otherwise have been.
And that's sort of, their benefits can be realized and
because someone's putting their hand up
to deliver it now, and that's the point.
So opposing projects,
because they're being deliberative, local authority, timing
or banking capacity for projects
that local authority deems more worthy
because of that timing is directly contrary to that intent.
And the proposed new section 84 A, that does go some way
to addressing this issue.
Uh, but similarly to Somerset Mylan's put forward some
suggested, uh, further additions to Section 84 A
to essentially address this issue head on.
And similar to Sunset, that's to enable conditions
to apply not only to the applicant,
but also to the providers, um, like water care, for example,
as your water infrastructure provider in Auckland.
The second key proposition,
and this is also echoing some said again, is
that benefits should seen be seen for
what they are benefits.
So for example,
in a region we have a serious widely acknowledged shortage
of homes in particular family homes
consenting 1,217 homes.
And I mean homes not just residential lots, which is
what you often get in projects that on its face
is a significant regional benefit.
And from my land's point of view,
without some careful changes to the FastTrack Amendment Act,
there is a risk that panels
and local authorities will continue to lose sight
of the wood for the trees when it comes to thinking about
what a project's benefits are.
So for that reason, it supports the changes to Schedule two
to be referring to projects with significant benefits.
Um, and it's also recommended a change to the, uh,
provision relating to government policy statements
to strengthen the way in which a panel would need
to consider a policy statement state when faced
with a substantive application.
The third proposition is ensuring
that the Fast Track approvals Act genuinely delivers a one
stop shop approach, um,
and that that is an absolutely critical efficiency
for applicants to deliver projects
and their benefits quickly.
There are a handful of points in the submission that go
to this, the changes to section 84 A
to further support access to infrastructure capacity.
Uh, one of them a second is a change to see, uh,
applications able to have an approval
to change a consent notice
that would sit alongside changes to conditions.
Uh, and then the third is a change to ensure
that when an existing application that has been lodged
by an applicant is superseded by a fast track application,
that superseding also sees
the applicant hold its place in the
queue for that application.
And that's particularly important in relation
to water take applications where your priority of access to
that water is determined
by when your application was accepted.
So we don't want to see a fast track application come in
behind an existing application
and suddenly drop to the back of the line.
So I, I think I'll leave it there.
Um, and you know, finish where I started, which is that
overall Mylan supports the changes
and has some recommendations
and we're happy to take any questions
because that's probably the best use of the 10 minutes.
Yeah, no, brilliant. Thank you very much.
We've got a couple of questions.
We'll go first to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks chair. Thanks for your submission.
Now, the out of sequence, um,
pushback we get from councils is quite real.
Um, so I guess would your, would your rationale be
provided the applicant as prepared to meet all the costs
of connection then?
It shouldn't be unreasonably withheld?
Definitely. And,
and that's a very standard approach for applicants.
I mean, the normal approach
for large scale residential development is
that ensuring the connection infrastructure is
provided as part and parcel of what they're doing.
And I, I just supplementary on that would be
sometimes the councils then they start to go, okay,
well if you're gonna do that, we're gonna supersize
or future proof, you know, the connection points
and then the developer would argue, oh, that's unfair,
that's above and beyond my, you know, development.
Um, do you have any thoughts around that?
Uh, in terms of that being used as a preventative tool?
Historically, um, we've had experience that
where this has occurred
and quite often, um, water care
for argument's sake will come to the party with a percentage
of the cost and we'll pay the, the balance.
So therefore we're paying for what we are actually using.
And if there's an up size required
or they they require for a future catchment
then is a cost sharing arrangement
and it works out to be quite equitable.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. You
Thank you. We'll now move
to Land Farm for a question.
Ua, thank you so much for your submission today.
I wanted to pick up on your support for the maximum
60 day timeframe from when the comments are received
and noting that this is, you know, indifferent
to whether it's a very complex proposal
or, you know, you gave that example of housing, for example.
Um, we've heard from other submitters,
particularly the fast track panel conveners themselves, um,
that they consider
that this will really threaten the quality
of decision making
and make it potentially vulnerable
to appeal in judicial review.
What, do you have some, uh, sympathy
or, um, awareness of that concern and,
and regardless, do you still support the 60 day
timeframe no matter what?
Can you expand on that?
I think starting point, um, really is
to get the benefit out of a project process,
a fast track process, the process actually has to be fast
and you can put in statutory checks
and balances to ensure that decision making
and the extent of comments are targeted to so
that the timeframe is, is used well.
I also think it's quite important that to just sort of
dispel what I see as a bit of a myth around that the quality
of applications that are being put forward, um, you know,
is somewhat lesser
or poorer than under the standard process.
Um, you know, I think my land's position on that would be
that the effort that goes into these projects
because of the understanding
around the short timeframe is immense.
And really they are applications
that are probably almost superior quality than you are
actually getting under the resource management
process as a consequence.
Thank you. Look, I just wanna jump in and ask a question
because you did talk about a one stop shop
and how really important it is that the,
the Fast Track provides that.
Do you think it's not right now?
Is that why you mentioned it?
Or do you feel obviously the system can do better,
which is why this amendment bill is a good thing?
Uh, the latter.
I I think it's, it's doing a really good job
and it's nearly there, but the process experience so far
for Myland but also for other applicants has been
that there are some changes that can be made
that don't adjust the mechanics
or, you know, out the scope of the act.
Um, but which would ensure
that one stop shop is a bit cleaner
and the consent, um,
notice change is a really good example of that.
So the act already has changes
for consent conditions in there.
A consent notice is essentially an extension
of a consent condition that ensures a condition of consent,
um, retains its potency once the
subdivision's actually been complete.
But at the moment there has been,
there have been different views over the extent to which
that's captured.
Um, and you know, from my point of view,
that's the prime one for being in front
of the appellate court, having a fight about
what Section 42 means in that respect,
where it's quite an easy fix to make,
but will make a very meaningful difference,
um, to applicants.
Brilliant. Thank you. Look, we have met time now.
Uh, we thank you for your submission,
a really thorough submission and, uh, yeah,
appreciate that analysis.
So thank you.
Thank you. So we will now
move on to our next submitter, which is Contact Energy.
Oh, we can see you there, mark.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You've got 10 minutes with us.
Uh, we do have your submission here, so take it as read.
'cause I'm sure there'll be questions,
but we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks.
Thank you. Oh,
you might just wanna turn your microphone on there.
You're just on mute.
We can see Mike and Brett there,
but, uh, we can't hear you,
so you might just want to just test the microphone there.
Um, now we seem appear
to have now lost the video there, Mike of you.
Um, Brett, do you wanna give it a try?
Yeah, sorry. We're, we're in two different
locations today, so, okay. We can
Hear you well, Brett, we, we can hear you there,
so if you perhaps want to start.
Okay. I'll give it a, give it a go.
Um, so I just wanna thank you all for the opportunity
to present today and if you work on this piece
of legislation, um, as contact,
we unashamedly approach this from a development perspective.
The energy sector has a, a moral obligation to continue
to build a pace and pick up the slack left by the demise
of the gas sector because we don't,
we know the impact on New Zealand businesses, homes,
the economy, and ultimately the climate.
If we aren't to electrify at pace, uh, we're proud
of our contribution to this at contact.
We've committed more than, sorry,
I thought I saw coming on in, uh,
committed more than 2 billion to renewable energy projects.
Oh, we might have, we, we,
we might have lost you there, Brett.
Oh, sorry about that. No, there we go.
I think we are back on. Do you wanna carry on?
Just trying, I just got a thing from Mike.
I think he might be.
Yeah, we don't seem to be seeing Mike.
He's just, um, perhaps dropped off there.
Okay. Um, so I guess that where I was picking up from,
sorry, is we, we're, we're investing at investing at Pace,
so more than 2 billion in the, since 2019 as a sector
where we're now investing more than at the think
peak of the think big era.
So to meet all this, we need to,
as a country confront the inevitable impacts
that renewable electricity generation has in
a mature and constructive way.
It's not saying we want to enable degradation
of New Zealand environment far from it, our intent is
to see nature positive outcomes
and leave the country in a better place.
But we are seeing a, a concern
where vested interests are probably having too much
influence, causing delays in a time of urgency.
The reality is we often see expensive lawyers face against
each other with only a small, uh, relationship
to any environmental impact.
Brett, I'm now on, sorry. Oh, thanks Mike.
Um, just leveraging what Brett was just talking about.
I do, I do wanna, um, take the panel, um,
the panel's attention to our recent consent
for the solar farm at Gloria,
a solar farm north of Auckland.
It's 160 megawatt DC project
that would provide new electricity for the equivalent
of 40,000 households.
It's one of the, it is on one
of the best sites in the country for renewable solar energy.
It has long summer hours, a great grid connection, it's near
to major demand in Auckland.
It is cited on farmland previously developed
for dairy decades ago.
Late in the process, a concern was raised
by Doc on the basis
of a student's vacation work about the impact of seabirds.
This was debated extensively before an expert panel,
but ultimately the evidence did not show even the remote
risk to threaten births.
This was the conclusion of fact
that the independent expert panel reached
and they granted the consent.
It's notable that DOC did not appeal, however, Forrest
and Byrd, after being engaging in the process prior
to this point, then lodged an appeal
to the high court a couple of weeks ago, three minutes
before the closing time of appeal.
They are now in a position to delay the project
for potentially years, including the ability
to escalate further if they don't come
to get the outcome they want to higher appeal courts.
It is also notable that Doc who initially raised this risk
have chosen not to join the appeal.
We were intending to think a file investment decision from
our board for this project earlier this month.
Follow, followed by finalizing lender of finances
with a consortium of highly reputable local
and international banks, as well as awarding EPC contracts
to local and international firms
to get works underway in the new year.
This is all on hold
and you can imagine the damage
to New Zealand's international reputation that
that has created.
And the project could well simply
unravel pending a court hearing.
We were not going to sit on this consent.
The delay will pull renewable energy out of our system.
At the very moment, the economy is crying out for more.
It has, by its very nature, increased the sovereign risk
that this nation pays for in the interest rates
and the returns on capital
that international investors demand.
Again, I want to reiterate that we respect the role
of honest and constructive debate
for the betterment of New Zealand.
This is how we ensure we lead the environment
and the economy in a better place for future generations.
But at the moment, the scales are in balance.
So we are at risk as a nation
by not delivering the investment the
economy desperately needs.
And if we do, we simply raise the cost, which will be paid
for by all taxpayers and all consumers.
We therefore support the proposed changes in this build
and I'm very, we are very happy
to collectively answer any questions you have about
what we've just spoken about and our written submission.
Look. Thank you very much, mark, uh,
Rachel Brooking has the first question for you. Mm,
Thank you. And apologies
if this is in your written submission.
Um, my tool isn't working and I can't bring it up.
Um, or so I can't access it.
I don't have it in front of me is my point.
Now you've talked about being nature positive
and how you want to be nature positive.
Um, I'm wondering if you've suggested any amendments
to the bill that would help make the fast
track nature positive?
I think being nature positive, I mean, let's,
let's be frank, new New Zealand has a world class
biodiversity and it also has a large
number of endangered species.
I don't think you can lead to slate
for good behavior if you're nature positive
or you need to, you need to take account of
that in the submission and you need to actually be able
to trust the commissioners to take the balance of views
to ensure that we get the right outcome
for the country. Why
Wouldn't, wouldn't those commissioners need some criteria
for them to be able to look at that aspect?
I don't necessarily agree on that.
You, we, you already have the, the balance of, um,
and the bill of between,
admittedly it does weight it towards development,
but the overall effects, this whole concept of effects
that we've lived with for the past 30 years,
it's not been done away within this bill.
No, it was of course repealed by labor.
Thank, thank you very much.
We've got a couple of other questions, grant McCullum?
Yeah, good day, Mike. Um, question,
have you ever done any, uh, good to see you, uh, um,
done any work on what you think this is actually costing the
average power consumer in this country?
All these delays and this comings and goings?
'cause I mean, ultimately it's about the supply and the,
and ultimately the price for the consumer and the finish
and the, and both industrial and domestic.
Look, we, we believe that look
for every megawatt of renewable energy
that is not dispatched at, let's say 80
to a hundred dollars per megawatt, eight to 10 cents.
Mm-hmm. You dispatch coal, gas,
or diesel at 250 to $400 and that sets the price.
And so if we want cheaper electricity, we have to ensure
that renewable energy is dominating in our,
is dominating the dispatch.
The moment a molecule of gas is dispatched, the price
over doubles, and that is the cost
that's ultimately born by the consumer.
Thanks, mark. Thank you. And Cameron Luxton,
Look, thank you. I have
a question. Uh, Mike, you've touched on the,
the sovereign risk and the overseas
investment that we're trying to attract.
Uh, could you expand on
how you think not passing amendments, uh,
to the fast track bill as the committee is currently, uh,
talking about if we were to pass these,
would the sovereign risk increase
and further to that question, if we were to pass it
and grant consents, if they were to then be revoked
by future government, what sort of effect would that be
In New Zealand? Oh,
if look overseas investors just want certainty.
And at the moment what we're finding as, as developers
of renewable energy, remember we are developing renewable
energy, is that we are being every step of the way,
we are being blocked from developing renewable energy.
And if we are being blocked as a local company,
international investors, I mean,
so I absolutely support the legislation
and the amendments being proposed.
I think we have been, as a nation,
we have lost out big time over the last three decades.
We've lost over a terawatt hour
of renewable energy per annum
through consents granted under the old RMA
and the moment, the, the sooner we can get certainty
around that framework.
Now, unfortunately, that requires investments.
If a future government decides to repeal those,
if a future government decides to overturn consent,
then you are really into high margins of, of,
um, sovereign risk.
But that is a choice of a future government.
And then you are talking not 50 to a hundred basis points,
you're talking three to 400 basis points.
You're talking, we are now into third world status.
And, and so that certainty is critical
and that protection from nuisance claims
through the high court system,
through vexatious claims is
absolutely critical going forward.
Thank you. Yes,
Thank you. Look, we've
got a question from Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Uh, I was just reading,
I think it was point 13 in your submission there, um,
quite fascinating around, uh,
I guess effectively third party appeal rights
and the cost that's being borne on the wider economy
through that delay.
Um, we had an earlier submission about judicial reviews
and trying to maybe narrow the scope for judicial reviews
as well as being potentially a key thing.
Um, did you have a view on that?
I couldn't see any sort of particular comments
around judicial reviews, more just
around those appeal rights.
I guess in your experience.
We would, we would put
judicial reviews in the appeal rights.
I think, um, we need development.
We've got to straighten the scrum in favor
of the development and, you know, a commission
or a panel of three, they're not a joke.
They're not a, oh yeah, that's easy.
But we, we know we're gonna organize a judicial review
and a couple of here, you've, you've got to put weight
and responsibility on those panels.
So the panels have to have weight.
And this confusion of, um, multiple parties being able
to come in and request, um, mixing up matters of law
with matters of factual finding
that those shenanigans have to come to an end.
And so that decline on the Southland Wind Farm, is
that now dead in the water or are
you trying to find a resource?
No, no. We have gone back
and been accepted into the fast
track resource concerning process.
A panel has been appointed
and we look forward to going through that process.
We are, of course, um, vulnerable to
judicial review appeals as we go through that process.
So one more, sorry, one more quick question. I
Got another okay. Just yeah, sorry.
On that very point, 'cause you,
because you're going through that at the very moment, Mike,
would, if this legislation passes,
would it capture your situation
because it's live? Does it need a
No, no, no. My
understanding is that we've submitted under the previous
fast track process or the process that's currently in place,
and it would, we would be grandfathered to that.
In fact, um, yeah, that we,
we put it into the revised fast track process.
So the, the the new process, I,
my understanding is it wouldn't apply.
Um, but it is what it is.
Our, our honest design, we just want pace, you know,
and our judicial system is not set up for the pace
that New Zealand needs to develop
to get the economic growth it deserves
and actually the renewable energy
it deserves. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank, thank you. Look, we are gonna have
to leave it there, Mike.
We have me time. We've actually gone well over time,
but, uh, we do thank you for your insights
and all the analysis today. Thank you.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you.
So we will now move on to our next submitter,
the Dunedin Museum of Natural Mystery.
Yes. Hello, Kira, can you hear me?
Yes, Bruce, we can hear you,
but we just can't see you at this point.
If you want to perhaps turn your camera on.
How's that? There we go. Perfect.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Yeah, Kira, thanks. Your opportunity to speak.
So, um, I am a, uh, a museum curator in Dunedin.
Um, and it's a small museum, but we are run by a committee.
Uh, we are a charitable trust
and most of the people on that trust, um, either work
with other museums or, uh, uh, members
of the local science community
or work for the university, et cetera.
Uh, I have a background in both science and the arts
and a long history as an environmentalist
and a conservationist.
And obviously, um, I reject this bill in its entirety.
I rejected the first version of it.
I am rejecting this version of it.
Um, and Frank, you know, I can't believe it.
So just gonna talk about a few things
that I didn't mention in my, in my submission.
So one is I was watching a, uh, video clip the other day
of Shane Jones, uh,
honorable minister talking back in 2010 saying
that mining would ruin this country.
Uh, so it's interesting to see that some ministers seem to,
uh, vacillate on this, on this issue.
And, uh, you know, I find it interesting.
Um, I think many of us know, uh,
or some of us know that all the government's,
2024 coal earnings was spent on treating
damages at a single mine.
Uh, and I'm talking about the Stockton Mine that wants
to expand on one
of the most unique ecological environments in the
country under fast track.
So as far as I know, it's still a climate emergency.
I'm wearing climate emergency t-shirt here on,
if you can see, that's still a climate emergency.
Uh, and that was declared by many local councils in 2019
and by the government in 2020 20.
Uh, but of course this current government is trying
to quietly pull out of the Paris agreement as we speak,
and I think we all know what's happening.
So I'm gonna speak particularly about Santana Minerals, uh,
because this is in my neck of the woods.
This is in Otago where I live,
and they have made a submission recently,
and they're hoping to get approval as fast as they can.
So just a little bit of information about the mine.
Uh, I think some of you'll be be experts on this,
but, uh, from my data, every teaspoon of gold will result
around 40 tons of rot, which will be crushed, uh,
and treated with dangerous chemicals.
And I'm talking about of course, arsenic and cyanide.
It's estimated that for every roughly ton
of c it's estimated that for, for every, uh,
sorry, that for every ounce of gold produced around 0.8
or 0.9 0.9 tons of CO2 equivalent will be produced.
And the gold industry and,
and most of these mine approvals are for gold mines.
Uh, some are for coal, uh,
and suggests the,
the gold mining industry's global footprint is around 120
to one 30 million tons annually.
So this would contribute these new gold mines,
the new coal mines significantly to our carbon footprint.
Uh, and as far as I know, it's still a, a climate emergency.
And as far as I know, we haven't pulled out of Paris yet.
So why these gold mines essential, you know,
um, and when we only, we know that only 10% of gold is,
is used for industrial purposes,
and most of the rest is used as a hedge against inflation
by people that can afford to do so.
We simply can't have more tourism
and more mines in central Otago.
Either we keep on developing the area
as an ecotourism region via the cycle trail,
which I'm involved in,
or we turn it into an ugly toxic waste sun.
The rocks, which Santana are planned to blast
and grind the sand will release us think as a fine dust,
which could blow all over the local area.
The cyanide they'll we using to extract the gold might,
might lech in the local vis and streams,
and then intellect dunton
and down the klu, the giant tailings dam they want
to build holding toxic slurry full
of the same arsing IDE might remain forever.
And this an earthquake releases the whole lot down in
the valley and into the lake.
This giant new open cast gold mine will be one
of the most visible things people see flying in
and outta Queenstown and will also be visible from the road
between Cromwell and Ika, particularly at night.
This damage will be irreversible
and the architects of this proposed mine will be answerable
and will have to live with the irreversible
consequences of this proposal.
Should it proceed. Not only will the visible impacts
and destruction of iconic landscapes,
but there'll be permanent storage
of vast quantities of toxic waste.
Um, in, in the area I'm putting both this government, um,
and, and the mining companies
and New Zealand Transport Association, um, on notice
that if this, if this government tries to rip up even more
of this country, they're going to need more surveillance.
They're gonna need more security guards, they're going
to need more police to protect the environment,
to protect these attacks on both humanity and nature.
Because a lot of good people aren't going to lie down
and let this destruction happen in the
name of a short term buck.
The fast track and this new permutation
of it is an attack on nature.
Our children and the treaty
and anyone pushing for this terrible legislation needs
to learn some science and develop some empathy,
or we're all in big trouble.
Thank you.
Thank you Bruce.
Uh, our first question comes from Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. From the same town. Um, thanks Bruce.
Uh, so we heard earlier from Santana
and they said that they had good community engagement,
and I'm wondering if you wanna comment on that,
but also my second question for you is, uh, your version
of what that Santana, uh,
mine could do is really catastrophic.
The explanation you gave just then, uh,
and you named a whole lot of different factors.
I'm wondering if you could also comment on the timeframe
of 60 working days to consider all the different variables
that you just talked about.
YY yes. Well, I think, you know,
that there's been quite a lot of contention
around Santana's consultation with the community.
Um, obviously I'm involved with sustainable Terras group.
Uh, we don't think they're being completely honest.
Uh, we've asked the for information, um, about things
and we've had a lot of trouble getting it.
Um, they've obviously said, we look,
we're gonna mitigate all these,
all your concerns, it's all gonna be fine.
But mining companies have got a long history in this country
of, of walking away
and leaving the taxpayer to foot the bill.
You know, a as it stopped in, you know, we are the, the,
the government's still still paying
to mitigate the mess that was made there.
And despite that, they want to expand so clearly, you know,
uh, uh, the 60 working days to
consider this massive new mine, you know, the size
of MACRAs, you know, which in 90 90, you know,
that wiped out the, a large part of the habitat
of the Otago skin, you know, one of our biggest skins.
And they also live in the Terrace hills.
So we're pushing our wildlife to the brink.
And, and I don't think 60 days is long enough.
And, and just further to that, all the different, um,
things you mentioned about tailings dams in the relationship
to Lake Dunston and the Kha River.
What sort of experts do you think,
if you were gonna make a robust decision about this mining
proposal, what sort
of experts would you want to be involved?
Oh, well, I mean, yeah, just, just across the board.
I mean, at the moment, the industry seems
to dominate these conversations.
Um, and scientists, uh,
and you know, the, the, the real experts often seem
to be sidelined and the media, you know,
which in this country, you know, most
of the mainstream media is controlled
by private individuals.
Uh, and so it's very hard to, to get a, uh, a proper debate
around these issues, uh,
and actually hear what,
what the scientific community, uh, is telling us.
So, you know, and so there's obviously climate issues here
as well as local ecological issues.
Uh, and I know, you know, a lot
of my friends are climate scientists.
It's very, very hard for them to get a voice, you know,
with this government in power, it's very hard
for local ecologists to get a voice
with this government in power.
Uh, and the main voices that we're hearing in the mainstream
media are the voices of the government and,
and the people that wanna push this kind of agenda.
Agenda. Look, thank you very much Bruce,
for your submission today.
We have met time and we appreciate your time. So thank you.
Thank you very much. So we are now moving on
to the West Coast branch of Forest and Bird.
Just wait for them to come through. There we go. We can, uh,
Yes. Um,
good afternoon.
Welcome Suzanne to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read
'cause I'm sure members will have questions,
but over to you if you opening remarks.
Yes, sure. Thank you Kiara.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
So I'm the chair of the West Coast
branch of Forest and Bird.
Um, our members live here on the West Coast Uni
and we are directly affected by Fast Track project proposals
and that's before even any, uh, decisions to
consent have been made.
We are already affected by the fast track process
and we are resolutely against the further erosion
of environmental protections, appeal rights,
and public participation contained in this bill.
So we have four listed fast track, um,
projects on the West coast.
One of them the Benignly named Bullah Plateau.
Continuous, uh, continuation project is the most egregious.
That's the proposal to mine.
20 million tons of coal over the next quarter
of the century on ecologically valuable public conservation
land and Lins land destroying, uh, unique ecosystems
and land forms, likely sending endemic, um, species
to their extinction, creating an acid mine drainage problem
for decades to come into the 21 hundreds
and creating millions of tons of carbon dioxide
and methane um, emissions.
And so our branch justifiably also names this project
as the most egregious
of all the 149 listed fast track projects.
So we would like to use Bathurst Mine proposal as an example
of the consequences if this bill is passed
and the application is processed under these
proposed changes to the act.
So the first point, information, evidence
and alternative perspective put
before the panel will be greatly diminished if Forrest
and Bird are not invited to comment.
And this is a distinct possibility
of the panel deemed councils dock
and Lynns have sufficiently covered the issues.
So Forest and Bird have a proven track record
or providing quality evidence,
often filling in the information gaps for decision makers.
Makers. So under the existing Fast Tracked Act, it is likely
that Forest and Bird would be invited to comment
as we have already been for about five large projects.
But this bill will turn likely into unlikely.
West Coast councils have a stated objective
of maximizing the o economic opportunity
from stewardship land.
So they are driven by economic development
at the expense of nature.
So they cannot be relied on to sufficiently cover the issues
because they are absolutely not impartial.
As an example, what if any expert evidence is the West Coast
Regional Council likely to provide on acid mine drainage
and dock and Lins are also under enormous strain
with their limited budgets and resources
and ministerial pressures.
So sadly it is not a given that either
of these government departments will sufficiently cover the
issues on Bathurst highly complex proposal.
And within the excessively short timeframes of Fast Track,
how will the panel decide if issues are sufficiently
covered, is opaque and problematic?
How will they know what they might not know?
How could the timeframes even work to give the opportunity,
um, to forest and Bird to highlight any shortcomings
and information gaps to assist the panel
in making this assessment?
This aspect of the bill has not been thought through
and has riddled with problems
and clearly it has been included as a deliberate means
of limiting participation
and avoidance of proper, proper scrutiny to favor consent.
And then we move on to these government policy statements
under the bill, we could see a government policy statement
on coal mining, which would effectively lock in the
assessment of regional
or national benefits of the industry, regardless
of the merits and impacts of individual projects.
The benefits of Bathurst mine could be placed on the
pedestal of a coal mining government policy statement
and become largely un unquestionable.
Yet we have seen in recent history
how precarious these benefits are.
So consider the escarpment mine on the Deni
and Plateau in 2014, the promise of hundreds of jobs
and millions in regional spending
by 2016 a mothball coal mine.
So coal mines are at the mercy of international markets.
It only takes steel, sorry, it only takes China
to reduce its steel production.
Markets are swamped with coing coal
and prices plummet often to below the cost of production.
So Bathurst will big up the hundreds of jobs
and the local spending benefits,
but the reality is that they will extract as much wealth
as they can while they can before they go bust.
And westport's economy will be left in free fall
because of its continued unhealthy dependency on Bathurst.
So as, um, one of the previous submitters, um, mentioned,
the entire government royalties from all coal mining across
the country are currently being spent cleaning up acid mine
drainage from state owned enterprise solid energy days at
the Stockton Mine on the Bull Plateau.
So a coal mining government policy statement would be
absurd, but a distinct reality under the ideologies
of the resources minister.
So the complexity
and scale of Bathurst coal mine can in no way be properly
evaluated within a 60 working day timeframe.
So the project involves a 20 kilometer long haul road
transecting the plateau gorging its way
through the pristine upper y Manaroo River Valley.
That in itself is a complex proposal.
And in 25 years
of opencast coal mining across 1,350 hectares in two
separate areas of public lands,
the highly experimental management of acid mine drainage,
um, impacting three significant waterways,
the impacts on at risk and threatened species.
The destruction of ecosystems
and land forms the exclusion of people in their connection
with these public lands.
The carbon emissions from the fossil fuel heavy machinery
to extract the coal and the silent methane emissions from
exposed coal seas.
The visual impacts the light pollution.
I could go on and on.
So to properly consider all these issues within 60 working
days is simply an impossibility.
So again, imposing this time limit is again,
to avoid proper scrutiny
and favor consent, making a process faster
and more efficient for highly complex proposal like Bathurst
Coal Mine will in inevitably result in poor decision making
and create consequences with a high cost to society
and then appeal rights.
So even if Forest and Bird was invited
to comment on bath's proposal under this bill,
appeal rights are stripped away
and appeal rights are already severely
curtailed under the act.
The judiciary is a crucial aspect of government, along
with the executive and parliament.
It's democratically unacceptable
to limit this aspect of government.
Again, clearly deliberate with NGOs like forest
and birds successfully preventing environmental
destruction by the courts.
Take the example of, um, of kuhar.
So today it would be likely
that there would be an open cast coal mining operating on
the mountain of Taha overlooking Westport.
If it wasn't for the tenacity of forest and bird standing up
and defending this precious place through legal action.
And today because of forest and Bird, Taha remains intact
and ecologically pristine
and Westport's water reserve has not been desecrated.
Um, the bill would give Bathurst a say on rejecting panel
members and no doubt they would make
full use of this influence.
I want to use the example of the 2023 general election
where Bathurst funded to the legal maximum,
the election campaign of Patrick Phelps, a mining lobbyist
to stand as an independent candidate
and his well-funded slick campaign gained him thousands
of votes and was a contributing factor
to Damien O'Connor losing his seat to national's.
Maureen Pugh and I point this out as an example of the links
that Bathhurst are willing to take
to influence the political sphere for their private gain.
I'd just like to jump in there, Suzanne.
Just, um, you know, if we can just keep things quite, uh,
general within the submission without making, uh,
accusations, um, that are unfounded.
That would be, that would be good. Thank you.
Yeah, sure. It was just as an example of, um,
the influence, um, that Bathurst, um, placed over,
um, the political situation and that that is factual.
So to finish this bill is an affront to our democracy.
The hundreds of thousands of people across the nation
who care deeply about nature
and our wild places, a safe climate and adjust
and fair world will not stand
for this direct attack on those core values.
This bill of passed will, um, result in
yet more civil resistance and civil disobedience.
We've already seen that here on the west coast
because it is taking away people's ability to participate,
to feel heard and valued, and what matters to them.
So democracy is not just about voting every three years.
It is about active regular participation in our civic
society and take that away from people,
and they will make a stand as they have already,
because at this crucial time in human history,
people are fighting for the chance of a livable future.
So this bill must be rejected outright. Kura.
Thank you. Look, we've got time for one question
and we'll go Toan.
Uh, thank you for your submission, Suzanne.
Um, given what you've, um, outlined, I mean the,
the government's presenting this bill is something
that will, uh, improve grocery competition,
but given your submission
and everything that you've pointed out
with the limitations on time, the increased powers
of the ministers, um, constraining community part
participation, do you think that this takes the bill closer
to, um, the original bill that hundreds of thousands
of people marched on the streets against?
Um, absolutely. It, it does.
It's, um, it's possibly even worse than the original bill,
um, because it's stripping away those appeal rights.
I mean, the, the fast tracked act for all its problems,
um, has been working.
Okay. Thanks to the EPA being impartial
and upholding good process as much as they can.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much, Suzanne,
for your time today.
We've met time, so, uh, we will need
to move on to our next submitter.
So thank you very much,
Kira. Thank you.
Um, so we will now move on to Jenny Easton,
who will join us shortly.
Um, fi um, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you Jenny, but we can't see you there.
But if you are happy to, uh, be online.
I can see Jenny chair. Oh, there we go.
We can see you there, Jenny. Brilliant. Oh, good. Welcome.
Welcome to the Environment Select Committee this afternoon.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you. In my written submission, I asked for the bill
to be withdrawn, and I also said that the changes proposed
by this bill would cause the public
to lose trust in their local council.
Okay, yep. I will expand on that loss based on my experience
of 25 years working for central and local government
and roles involved field work and public engagement.
First, as a public health inspector
and then as a resource scientist dealing
with contaminated sites,
we know from political polls that the trust and center
and the current central government is currently very low.
And we also know
that trust is essential when institutions expect progress on
projects that have a real or a perceived risk.
This bill further reduces trust as it proposed
to remove much of the decision making from the expert panel
and give it to ministers by way
of a government policy statements,
truncate the panel's deliberation time,
and also remove the ability of the public iwi
and environmental groups to participate in most
of the fast track projects.
This bill expects local government to speak on behalf
of the communities,
and that will destroy the trust
that the public have on them.
That's because the council have built up their trust
with the long-term plans.
This process involves extensive engagement with stakeholders
for public and elected representatives.
A council project has to be in the LTP to get funding,
and that is to stop current councilors from having their pet
projects pushed through the system
with all the unintended consequences from coastal
subdivisions and dangerous stop boxes, et cetera.
The bill wrongly assumes that the local authority
will have the expertise and,
and authority to speak
for the public when they haven't actually,
uh, consulted with them.
Either iwi affected downstream neighbors who,
who will get noise dust over in traffic
or environmental groups.
In addition, the council won't have the ability to influence
the ministerial overreach and the handpicked expert panel.
So in fact, the council has been set up to fail.
Their social capital has been exploited and wasted,
and they'll have an uphill job to win back trust.
The outcome is
that the fast rate projects won't have a social license
for the to operate
because they've been excluded from all meaningful decision
making and without affordable legal avenues to follow,
we can expect that the actions will be taken to store
or disrupt projects.
I've seen that in the contaminated site field.
Unfortunately, the council's role in this bill will have
serious consequences very soon
because the National Adaptation framework published last
month states that the councils will be required
to undertake the work with their communities to prepare
for the frequent and extreme climatic effects in the future.
Now, councils need to have the public trust to create,
regulate and support resilient communities
and the social cohesion required to get fu
through the future climatic effects of floods, droughts,
fires, and heat waves, landslides and sea level rise.
And on the South island,
we also worry about magnitude eight.
Alpine fault Road rupture is overdue.
The idea that you can override the public input into matters
of national and regional significance,
and somehow get these high risk projects through
with no unintended consequences
or long-term adverse effects on society,
and the natural environment is deeply flawed.
That's the end of that.
But I just wanted to add, I've been listening to some
of the recent, um, submitted speaking
and the contaminated site issue comes up
over and over again.
And what's happened in Nelson is what's been, um, called,
uh, um, housing project is in fact on top of a sheep dip
that's got very high levels of Dedant so high
that they can't take the dedant to a landfill.
So there are things that the Environment Court didn't agree
to that have now gone through on the fast track,
and it's really upsetting for me
as a contaminated site person who worked on something
as complex as the now pesticide factory cleanup
to hear the locals saying that they regard the council
as an enemy and that they don't trust them even to monitor.
Thank you, Jenny, for your submission.
Look, we have met the five minutes, so, uh, we thank you
for your time today and your insights, um,
and all your experience that you've contributed.
So thank you very much.
Um, so we are just going to, uh, skip forward on the agenda
and move to Alyssa Howard, our next submitter.
We can,
there we go.
We can see you there and here.
I wasn't sure if it was my turn. I hard to follow. No,
No. Well, thank you for joining
us this afternoon.
You've got five minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you so much for this opportunity.
Many of the projects that were invited by government
to submit under Fast Track have significant impacts to many,
and these are risks as well as benefits.
It's essential that projects that get the green light
to proceed are selected only after robust
and open discussion from wherever possible.
The wider spectrum of stakeholders.
These amendments shrink the capacity for robust
and open discussions, and together skew the outcome
and the direction of the proposal acceptance,
making resulting outcomes, not necessarily just
or transparent that the purpose of this package
of amendments was marketed as
enabling supermarket competition is spin
at its most deceptive.
The leg. This legislation pro prioritizes sub the submitter
of a fast tech, a fast track proposal as follows,
through the shortened submission process of this bill
and the go, and the government's intention
to pass it onto urgency through restoring
overarching power to the minister by enabling him
to declare projects of national or regional significance
and issue policy statements through
enabling the minister to direct the process
of the discussion panel
through placing a narrow time constraint on the
establishment of the panel.
This is likely to determine who is available for the job
and restrict the panel through limiting
who the panel is able to consult with,
thus restricting the widest range of
relevant information that is available
through setting a time limit for the decision, irrespective
of the complexity of the case through
enabling limited opportunities for appeal.
In the government's early signaling
of its fast track intention has allowed substantial time
for proposals to be compiled.
However, the working time of the panel is only six weeks
irrespective of the complexity of the project.
Therefore, there is a need for, if, if there is a need
for the panel process to be extended to enable them
to perform due diligence, the panel must be able to apply
for it rather than having the outcome of further time
left in the hands of the developer.
My personal concern is that the growth, growth growth
paradigm will result in poor environmental outcomes
as biodiversity and habitat for other species
are poorly valued in this model.
This is a pertinent concern,
particularly in the intentions which have been widely
expressed to enable mining
of the Jan Maier plateau for coal, the Bendigo area
and the catchment of Oo springs, the gold short-term gain
for permanent destruction of places of wonder.
And that's what I've got to say.
Brilliant. Thank you very much for your submission
and insights this afternoon.
It appears that we don't have any further
questions from members,
but we do appreciate your time this afternoon.
So thank you very much for your submission. Thank
You for being able
to participate. I really appreciate it.
Thank you. Uh,
now it looks like, uh, we're just waiting for our pity
Arco tribal authority to come through.
Uh, we, the clerk might be able to just, uh,
let us know if, uh, we have them.
Uh, they were there and I think they've disappeared.
Okay. It appears that we, uh, do not have any of the
submitters, uh, online yet.
So we will just, uh, break for two minutes to, uh,
give members just an opportunity.
We'll resume, um, in, uh,
we'll resume at 2 25.
Do we still have that 10 minute break coming up?
Uh, it will,
it will depend Rachel on whether we can get
some of these submitters.
We've had quite a few, um, drop off.
Um, so we kind of move it, we're juggling it
around a little bit depending on who pops up.
Okay. So we yes, we, we are planning to Absolutely.
So, um, and then we may not, some of the submitters Yeah,
we just haven't got on board this
afternoon. They just haven't come through.
Okay. All very short notice. So understandable. Thank you.
So welcome back everyone.
Uh, we now have our next submitter who has joined us
from the Tribal Authority
and we should have Julie Shepherd with us.
Can you hear me? Yes, we can.
Welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
Julie, thank you for joining us.
Uh, you have 10 minutes, so we will hand it over to you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you for the opportunity
to present the oral submission on behalf
of Pergo Travel Authority.
Um, I'm here to speak
to our submission on the Fast Track approvals Amendment Bill
2025, and to reaffirm the concerns
and aspirations we raised in our original submission
to the Fast Track approvals.
Bill on 19th of April, 2024 is a PU
of NUI based in ANA with post settlement governance entity
with statutory responsibilities under the
settlement Act 25.
Our role is to uphold the man and of our people.
UA and our Tonga, let me be clear, are not opposed
to necessary infrastructure
or development that serves the wellbeing
of our communities and the nation.
We recognize the importance of efficient processes
to deliver essential projects, roads, waters, energy,
and other services that underpin our collective future.
Our opposition is not to progress itself,
but to the way in which the fast track regime,
both in its original
and amended forms, undermines the rights, responsibilities
and partnership obligations that are fundamental to
Ros constitutional framework.
In our first submission,
we highlighted the bill's unprecedented, unprecedented
concentration of decision making power in the hands
of few ministers, the curtailment of public
and Maori participation,
and the risk of undermining the principles
of partnership protection and participation enshrined in.
We warned that the bill would ab enable projects
with significant potential for harm to bypass the checks
and balances that are the foundation
of responsible environmental protection.
In we also spoke to the real world impacts
of such a regime in ANA
has witnessed the cumulative effects
of development declining ANA disrupted tidal flows,
and the loss of biodiversity in nu
here is not an abstract concept.
It is our home, our identity,
and our responsibility to future generations.
That amendment bill
before you today does not address those
fundamental concerns.
In fact, it exacerbates them.
The replacement of meaningful consultation
with mere notification is not a minor,
a minor technical change.
It is a profound erosion of our statutory role
as a hapu post settlement governance entity.
The departmental disclosure statement itself acknowledges
that this will reduce the quality of engagement
and the opportunity for Hapu and Maori to have input
before decisions are made.
The amendment bill also narrows appeal rights,
compresses timelines, and further centralizes power in the
minister of, in the hands of ministers.
These changes disproportionately disadvantage
hapu Maori entities, many of whom operate
with limited resources and capacity.
The expectation that we can respond meaningfully to complex
high stakes applications within compressed timeframes is
unrealistic and unfair.
It privileges well-resourced developers
and government agencies at the expense of those
who are supposed to be treaty partners.
Our recent experience
with the Kami Hydro Electro Power Scheme Recon Consenting
Processing is a case in point.
Despite our statutory role under the
NU Settlement Act 2025, KO was only included as a copy to
recipient, not as an invited or statutory participant.
This exclusion is not a minor oversight.
It is symptomatic of a border failure by government agencies
to coordinate effectively
and to recognize the statutory standing
of hapu entities under settlement legislation.
The Settlement Act is not just a legal instrument,
it is a living covenant between the Crown
and the hapu of ana.
It was enacted to ensure that hapu, not just Iwi,
have a direct and meaningful relationship with the Crown
and that our voices essential in decisions affecting our ua,
Moana, Anton, the amendment bill is currently,
sorry the pictures changed.
We call on the committee as a result, as a result
of this amendment bill to amend the bill
to require genuine meaningful consultation
and partnership with hapu po.
Settlement governance entities, not just notification,
ensure that the statutory roles
and responsibilities of hapu entities under settlement
legislation are explicitly recognized
and protected in all fast track processes.
Guarantee Marty and Hapu representation
and expertise on all decision making panels,
uphold the principles of partner partnership, participation
and protection under respect
and give effect to the intent
and provisions of hapu specific settlements such as
Nu Settlement Act 2025.
In closing, I want to acknowledge the hurt
and frustration that this process has calls for our people,
the fast track regime in both its original
and amended forms risk.
Returning us to a time where Maori voices were sidelined
and our rights were treated as obstacles
to be managed rather than as a foundations for just
and sustainable future.
We urge you to take these concerns seriously,
to honor the commitments made in treaty settlements
and to ensure that the future of
ROA is built on genuine partnership,
environmental stewardship, and respect for the mana of iwi.
Thank you.
Thank you Julie. Um, land Farm has a question
Qua Julie, thank you so much for your submission today
and thank you for highlighting the very, uh, clear example
of the Kami Hydroelectric power scheme.
Can I just ask for clarification on that?
So you, you're talking about, um, ya
not, you know, it being an oversight
that you're not included as a statutory, uh, partner
and consulted with is, was that an oversight?
Like, are you now involved or still not at all.
So we are involved, you know, sometimes a door appears
and we have to do a lot, you know, um, undertake a lot
of work to get through that door,
but essentially, uh, fast track processes, uh, engaging with
iwi, um, bodies and iwi settlement trusts.
But our settlement is hapu centric
explicitly and as Hapu,
we'd been engaging on this project for almost two years
and have formed really good, you know, really, uh,
collaborative successful relationships in the items
that we want to address, such as Fresh Passage remediation
as an example, uh, to find that the applicant
Manu Energy had, um, sent out the invitation, assuming
that because we are post settlement, uh, as
that we would be involved
and was actually reprimanded for sending that invitation.
And we had to come, you know, through a whole new legal, uh,
communicative series of emails.
Um, and the Conant, um, herself was very helpful
and, um, you know, understood all of these things
and found in this case, uh, GA with
Ministry for Environment
and the EPA, hopefully that gap will be closed.
That's really helpful. Thank
You. Thank
you Julie. Uh, look, we have met time.
We appreciate your time today, so thank you for coming
and making your submission.
I really appreciate the opportunity given that, um,
I was called in in the last sort of two minutes to, uh,
fulfill the oral submission
and I was going at it like a mad thing trying to,
uh, have to say.
So thank you very much everyone.
No, we appreciate you coming on. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, so now we will move, um, forward to
Mahi Tayo, uh, who should be online with us.
There we go. We can see you both.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you.
You've got 10 minutes, but take your submission as read
and, um, members, I'm sure we'll have some questions too,
so keep that in mind
and we just, maybe just turn your audio on there.
Alright, There we go. We can hear you. Brilliant.
My name is, uh, hopefully to my side, uh,
is also
a group of RAN who aspire to see a better
for deliver
on man aspirations for climate action here in T.
And as you said earlier, Nui,
we do take our written submission as read today,
qua, he and I will be representing the entirety of
which includes May
Mate
Haven.
Now, the fast track legislation
and why it's not worth the paper, it is written on
legislation must work for all living in.
This means that deep consideration must be given
to the impact that any project will have on the current
and future generations
framework Through these ministers
who are hoarding power
and decision making abilities, our ha NGOs,
community groups, iwi
and Hapu will have their ability to challenge decisions,
uh, restricted.
It will become harder for our people
to be engaged in the process as opposed to the RMA
mechanisms already exist to support communities, um,
engagement throughout these types of processes.
This legislation, which is neither fast
nor on the right track, undermines years
of advocacy from experts, iwi, hapu and communities.
Now what do we want to see happen?
Uh, this government has pre-existing obligations
and responsibilities underneath te obligations, chores,
onus, task, assignment duty, whatever word you want to use.
None of them are outlined
or defined as optional, nice to haves.
This bill, as it stands, cannot pass.
Alro deserves legislation that honors the rights committed
to by the Crown entity in 1840.
Alro deserves to have legislation that is democratic,
considers future generations, and most importantly,
causes no harm to Papa.
On a personal level, I'm from Pat, which is a small
but mighty hapu up in T
regarding the sand mining project in Brain Bay.
Do not want sand miners in our backyard destroying our ta,
tamana and beaches for generations to come.
They got kicked out at ri Embarrassed by
and they're not welcome at tu
We urge the government to throw this bill out
and take meaningful action to strengthen community hapu
and iwi engagement.
Hmm, Kilda. Thank you.
Uh, land Farm has a question for you.
Ua, thank you so much for your submission today.
Uh, we heard from another submitter earlier in the day
who had 30 plus years of experience in
resource management planning that he hadn't seen
anything like this before.
I wondered how it feels Ashi to be,
I guess, you know, growing up in this, uh, time
where bills like this
are actually coming directly from your government, um,
and impacting your communities, your hapu,
your iwi, whatever the case may be.
Can you give us an idea about what, what it feels like
to be, I guess, on the receiving end
of legislation like this?
I think there's so much beauty
that comes within being Maori
and having a deep connection to the FENO that we stand on.
And I feel like there's, there's so much opportunity, uh,
and potential for Crown
and Maori relations to be world-leading
for indigenous relations in ro
to be guiding the way in which other indigenous taki I
around the world, um, seek restoration, seek,
um, mediation.
And so it's not surprising
that this government is attempting to shove through
yet another piece of vegetation that wants to describe
their obligations and their rights, uh, to te Maori.
Uh, but Ashi, uh, it leaves me feeling hopeless.
It leaves me feeling upset, distraught, yet not surprised.
And it makes me look
and reflect on the amazing mechanisms that te Maori
that other indigenous, um, pu
around the world are putting in place to manage, um,
tei, um, the forms of it across Hawaii, across Tewa and ua.
And so, although it leaves me feeling disappointed,
you're not surprised in the government that we have, uh,
encourage us to reflect on the other forms
of change making in the world, uh,
from our other indigenous brothers
and sisters, not just in Timan and UA
and the Pacific, uh, but also around the world.
Sure. Thank you. Thank you very much.
It appears we, we have no further questions,
but we appreciate your time today and um, your view.
So thank you.
Thank you. So members,
uh, we are now going to break, uh, until three o'clock
and we will resume at three.
So see you then.
Welcome back everyone.
So we now have our, uh, next submitter, the New Zealand
Minerals Council, who I can see there with us.
Welcome to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Lovely to have you with us.
Uh, you have 10 minutes, so we will hand it over to you
for your opening remarks.
Thank you, Catherine. And for those who don't know me,
I'm Josie Fidel, the CEO of
the New Zealand Minerals Council,
and we advocate for the mining industry.
I did want to take this opportunity to appear in person, uh,
to once again counter the misinformation about mining
projects and this legislation.
And obviously the piece
of legislation you're looking at at the moment is a lot
of technical changes, but it's a good opportunity
to reflect on the why of this, uh, legislation.
So law can either stop things like crime
or it can enable things to happen like progress.
So environmental law had got into the stage where instead
of enabling things to happen, the roadblocks
and red tape were becoming insurmountable in a small country
that relies on business and trade to exist
and needs to get some projects up
and running to improve our economic position.
If the law is bad, it makes sense to fix it.
So that's why we support the Fast Track Approvals Act
and the subsequent amendments that are
before the Select committee.
There is no reason why the amendments cannot be made
with haste given there is already experience
to draw from in the fast track.
Processing efficiency is not a dirty word
and avoiding duplication
and unnecessary costs will benefit, will be
of benefit in this process,
which is very time consuming for applicants.
This is not a pathway for small projects.
It requires many hundreds of work hours
and costs millions of dollars to get an application
before an expert panel.
The mining sector supports New Zealand's High environmental
standards and does not seek to undermine this.
We believe the Fast Track Approvals Act strikes the right
balance in this regard.
In fact, experience to date shows
that it is not the rubber stamp
that many critics thought it would be.
The panels have been rigorous in their analysis of projects.
We are not looking for any weakening
of existing environmental safeguards
and there is a lot of noise around this legislation.
Su suggesting that this is happening without any evidence.
It, it's important that the foundation
of the fast track process is in fact evidence and science.
We accept that fast change can be difficult for some,
so it is important that there is
transparency in the process.
The transparency with this legislation is extraordinary.
With all the information readily accessible,
there is a dedicated fast track website.
Anyone can go there
and see all the paperwork for a substantive application,
including all the technical reports, project maps,
proposed approvals and conditions, existing approvals
and authorizations, consultation
and engagement records, management plans, land ownership,
et cetera, thousands of pages per application.
Then once the application is before the expert panel
or the correspondence is published, any further reports
and advice are published.
Expert panel minutes are published,
information about conferences, workshops,
and hearings is published.
And comments from invite parties are published.
The process is incredibly transparent.
Hundreds of parties have been asked
for comments on the mining projects already in progress
and all of their comments are published.
Any suggestion that there are not adequate checks
and balances as erroneous in our submission,
we have focused on the areas
that could benefit from changes given the direct experience
of applicants from the mining industry and the process.
As you will be aware, mining projects are in fact a very
small percentage of the 149 projects listed in the
Fast Track Approvals Act.
There are just 11 mining projects.
These are projects that belong on the list
because they present significant regional
or national benefits.
As per the purpose of the Fast Track approvals act.
Mining is the most productive sector
in the New Zealand economy.
It is also the highest value use of product productive land
in terms of the annual return earned from it.
And it is conducted over a relatively small footprint.
Jobs are highly paid.
Mining wages average 100, $1,100 compared
with the New Zealand average of 66,000.
The mining industry contributes directly to the government
and local government in addition to all forms of taxes
and significant rate payment payments, miners pay,
they also pay royalties, which is a revenue source.
Other industries don't contribute to
mining companies contribute to the communities
where they operate with sponsorships,
donations and services.
This includes work in schools, conservation projects,
local health services, maintaining community heritage,
emergency services
and social services
where mining companies operate on the conservation estate.
They can contribute to pest
and predator control conservation programs and planting
and maintaining unique environments.
Some of this work goes way beyond what the Department
of Conservation will be able to do with its budget
because of the cost to get a mine up and running.
Some mines have overseas investment and ownership,
but it is very important to note the jobs are filled
by people living in New Zealand
and the spent, the money spent running mines goes
into the New Zealand economy.
So when we talk about the projects
and the fast track process, we are talking about new jobs,
more money into regional economies
and meeting the government's goal
of doubling exports from mining in the next 10 years.
So thank you for letting me make some introductory remarks.
I'm happy to take any questions.
Look, thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, look, we'll go first to Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Uh, thank you for that.
And uh, a lot of that submission to summarize was, um,
to say how the fast track act as it is is working
to be robust.
And uh, you've also mentioned there's some very complicated
mining projects which have a lot of different, um,
technical expertise involved in them.
Now, we've heard the panel conveners say
that 60 days will just not be long enough to make a decision
for those big complicated projects.
And I was wondering if you can respond to that,
why you want changes to the Fast Track Act, which seems
to be you say working well
and also, um, you, you said that you're not look looking
for a weakening of environmental safeguards.
Um, what advice do you give
to your membership
who are applying under the fast track in terms of, uh,
being proactive about offering up environmental safeguards?
So the applications from the mining industry you will see
are thousands of pages that, that do include
covering off all of the impacts of the project,
how they'll be mitigated.
That's, that's all, that's sort of bread
and butter for a mining project anyway
'cause they have to do that when they
go through any process.
Um, but what, uh, obviously the changes we've, um,
made in our written submission are, uh, specific to, um,
where we think things could be, uh, tightened up.
You've talked about the, the panels in the 60 days.
We submitted originally on the act
and we have submitted in our, uh, on this, on the amendments
that because of the nature of mining projects
and the fact that there are thousands of pages of reports
to read that, that the panel would benefit from
mining expertise.
Uh, we really believe there should be someone on these
panels who can answer those questions around
complex projects without them having to go fish as it were,
and find someone and get another report.
And so that relates to the 60 days.
If the processes, which is the purpose
of this amendment bill, if the process can be
made more streamlined
and that benefits the panel in making a decision, that's
where we'd like to see things go
from the two mining applications.
There have certainly been extensions or the ones that are
before, uh, expert panels.
There have certainly been time extensions
because everybody wants us to work.
So it's not a, this can't happen,
but it's, um, maybe we can make it easier for you if some
of the questions you have to keep asking.
You could have someone sitting on your panel who could go,
oh yeah, I can answer that,
or I know where to find the answer to that,
or something like that.
So yeah, that was our, that that, that's our submission
around the expert panel having the tools they
need to make their decisions.
Thank you. Does that answer your question, Rachel?
Um, it's a surprising answer, um,
to speed up things by having, uh,
a mining expert on the panel when in my experience,
having worked on lots of mining applications,
it's been a wide range of issues that panels have had
to, uh, consider.
And I agree totally with you that they are very complex and
and large under other processes.
Uh, so I was wondering though, if you are, you kept saying
that you're not looking for weakening
of environmental safeguards.
And you talked then in your answer about mitigation methods.
So when you are talking to, to the companies that are part
of the New Zealand Minerals Council,
do you advise on treating the fast track, the amount
of information required
as if it was a Resource Management Act application?
Absolutely. Yeah. The more information they provide,
the easier it is for the process to work.
And they're well used to providing this information.
Indeed. Thank you. Look,
we've got time for one last question.
I'm gonna go to Grant McCullum.
Yeah. Hi, it's Chris. Long theme. Hold on. Yeah.
Long similar theme. Thank you.
Um, you, you highlight about the panel membership
'cause it's been suggested you, you can,
you expressed some concern about the opportunity for, uh,
applicants to, um, uh, object
or raise concerns about a particular panelist.
I'm just, you know, and I'm just curious as to you,
you know, expand on that please.
I don't think we've commented on the raising concerns,
but we have advocated for, um, the panel makeup to,
uh, include that really specialist expertise.
You, you make the comment, there's a risk
that this provision could be seen in ing applicants
to find panelists more sympathetic to their views.
That's, uh, clauses 26 through, um, 26
through 31 in your application, in your, um, submission.
Sorry. Yeah. And so obviously our submission is
to the select committee that's considering this
and to, to think about, uh,
we are not saying we should put the person on the panel.
We are saying a panel should have consideration for the fact
that these are complex and
therefore seek, uh, mining expertise.
And, and I, I know that people have, um,
in the mining industry who are advisors, um, have made,
have sent their CVS to the ministry for the environment
and never heard anything back.
So I I, I'm a, I'm a solutions person.
If you've got a panel
and there's something they don't understand,
why can't they ask an expert in the industry
or have an expert in the industry help them.
Um, as long as that there's no conflicts of interest
and it's not seen as us saying, you must have this person,
we're just saying pick a person
who can answer your questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, Josie, thank you.
We have met time. We've actually gone over time
and I know that, uh, there is a lot of interest
and there are members who have not been able
to ask questions, but I do appreciate your time today
and your submission.
So thank you. We, we have other submitted.
We're happy to engage with anyone at
any time, so thank you.
So we are now moving on to our next submitter
who has been waiting Environment Canterbury,
the Canterbury Regional Council.
Catherine, uh, thank you very much chair
for the opportunity to, uh, to speak to our submission.
Yes, welcome, welcome
to the select committee this afternoon.
So you've got 10 minutes with us
and we'll hand it over to you,
but do take your submission as read
because members will have questions.
Yeah, excellent. So, um, yeah, we'll take it as, uh, red.
We've made a short and sharp submission on the fast track
move, um, improvements amendment bill that's necessary
because the timeframes
for feedback on the bill have been incredibly tight.
Uh, there's a lot going on for regional, uh,
councils at the moment, including conversations
of the future of, uh, regional councils and our roles
and functions in the Resource Management Act.
So we're finding it important to make sure that we, uh, um,
have a, have a say there.
We're up for the types of conversations that we, uh,
think you're gonna have, um,
with the government engaging on us at the
start of these processes.
Um, our regional councils operate at the coalface
of the delivery of, um,
the Resource Management Act and our regions deeply.
And the government needs to, uh, acknowledge that, um,
to take pragmatic legislation that works in practice.
And I look forward to the committee, uh,
talking more about this, uh, with our hat on to as
to u kahiki later on.
Uh, we think the changes to the fast track move, uh,
approvals act are important conversation to engage with.
Uh, we do think, we do think that changes are, are key
and the three points from our submission are
that we don't support the changes
that remove the requirement for applicants
to consult local authorities
and mano prior to lodging, uh, and application.
There's a lot of benefit for applicants in communities
and mano with the current approach.
It allows issues to be identified upfront,
including discussions on mitigation strategies
and possible consent conditions at the front end.
It's also a lot faster and cheaper that we've found, uh,
to have these conversations at the start of the process, uh,
rather than during later stages of the hearing.
We don't support changes that shorten timeframes, uh,
timeframes for counsel
to provide feedback on applications to the minister.
20 days is already a short timeframe.
Uh, 15 days we are saying is too short.
We've also got a lot of due.
We've also got a lot of due diligence checks that, uh,
councils need to do.
And these are major proposals that we're talking about,
not just small proposals that get off the ground quickly.
Uh, there's a significant risk for everybody, uh, ministers,
communities, applicants mana.
If we do get this bit wrong, uh,
decisions can be challenged, uh,
blowing out timeframes even more.
It makes sense to have a little bit more time upfront
to get these things right.
Uh, and that reduces the risk
of spending time in court at the back end.
Some changes that are needed
to make sure rate payers don't bear the costs
of private development.
There are new proposals that allow for hearing panels
to impose conditions require an adequate
infrastructure to be provided.
This could be interpreted as regional councils
or, uh, rate payers and, and people of the regions
or the cities or, uh, districts needing
to fund infrastructure.
Examples could be flood protection, drainage infrastructure.
Uh, we don't think that's the intent.
Uh, so the cause just needs a little bit of refinement
and we've mentioned that in our submission, uh, to close.
We thank you for giving us the opportunity
to discuss what's in front of us, um,
and we are happy to take any questions.
And I believe we've got our deputy chair
as well, uh, who is here.
Thank you, Dion.
Look, we've got first question from Lan Farm
Koto, thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, I'm really interested in the example
that you mentioned in your written submission about those
constructive discussions between applicants
and council staff prior to actually lodging the application.
And you talk about something about site contamination
and biodiversity aspects.
Can you expand about what that actually meant, um,
in practical terms for the application?
Yeah, so one of the, the, one
of the examples is we've got a pound road in, um,
industrial development,
and that's NY Tahu Holdings has been, uh, doing that.
Uh, so the permits that required from the regional council
were the earthwork storm water construction phase
and the operational discharge.
And the key issues that we had to address in
that were the site contamination
and those biodiversity impacts that you were discussing.
Um, so the discussions
that the council staff obviously were having was the
identification of alternative sites for lizard relocation
and other aspects in, in, in that space.
Um, the, the, at the moment, the, uh, supported,
we have supported the, uh, application to being granted
and the consent conditions have been agreed upfront.
And having those consent conditions being agreed upfront
saves a lot of time at the back end, uh,
for when commissioners or other people need
to be looking at making those conditions if they don't have
those conversations up front.
So that really does make sure that you're streamlining the,
you're streamlining a whole lot of stuff up upfront,
ironing out some of those issues so
that later down the track when you really start getting into
more technical details that you don't have, um,
you don't have conflicts in that, in that later phase.
Thank you. And then just a
follow up chair, if there's time.
Yes. No, go for it. La
So then presumably, you know, the outcome of,
of those early decisions, if not, oh, sorry.
Early consultation if it's not there.
Um, you mentioned in your submission that you support
to Iru Kahiki submission,
which you may be speaking to later as well.
Yes. But I, I noted in their submission they talked about,
um, the risk of
actually panels feeling like they couldn't grant consent
because there's incomplete advice
and that might actually lead to more declines.
Would that be what you would expect if, if these kind of,
um, early engagements and robust, robust process
and time for robust process is not made?
Yeah, I mean that you've, you've basically said the answer
to your question and, and saying what you said,
we absolutely support that.
Having those conversations upfront, uh,
ironing out those issues will give confidence
to hearing commissioners
that they are making the right decision.
If they don't have the Abso well, if there's the absence of
that information upfront, uh, there is absolutely a risk
that they won't be able to make a decision.
And if you are shortening timeframes to 60 days, uh,
you may find that commissioners go, oh, hang on a minute.
We can't make a decision in those days,
we're just gonna decline it.
So there is a very big risk in that respect.
I might just jump in and ask a supplementary there,
because I'm quite interested, um, in putting some context
around that in terms of the consultation,
'cause it's come up quite a bit through a lot
of the submissions.
Have you got some Canterbury projects there
that you could use as an example, uh, just
to put a little bit of light on this as to where you feel,
um, you know, consultation works
and hasn't held up the process?
Yep. So we've got 23 listed projects.
Um, so I've just got some numbers here for you.
We've got five of them have proceeded down the standard RMA
process and three of them have, uh, been granted consent.
Five have lodged through the fast track process.
One has been granted consent.
That's the, uh, Genesis Tepo power, uh, scheme.
Uh, the staff have engaged on 16 proposals with six,
six applications, uh, lodged.
And the pre-consultation discussions have highly been useful
from, um, all parties.
And that's the feedback that we've been getting
from, from all parties.
Uh, and that engagement includes discussions on scoping
with the applicant right upfront, uh,
feedback on draft applications.
So that's, uh, the actual drafting of what those,
how they may look as they go into the system.
And we've got a lot of learnings from the, uh,
previous fast track processes around, uh,
what works and what doesn't work.
But one of the things that is working is
that there is definitely a cost
and efficiency point of view.
So this is the, the argument about efficiency
versus effectiveness.
Uh, you can't necessarily sometimes drive efficiency, uh,
without having also effectiveness.
And we are, what we are saying here is that the efficiencies
that you're trying to drive may, may come at the detriment
of baked of having an effective application, which means
that later down the process you get a more smoother outcome.
Okay, thank you very much. Uh, look, we've met time today.
We appreciate your time, um,
and your submission. So thank you.
These things go really fast.
Thank you for the time to, uh, um,
present that. Thank you very much.
Brilliant, thank you. Look,
we will now move on to our next submitter
who is the port of toga.
Hello, can you hear us?
Yes, we can. Good afternoon.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon,
and thank you for your submission.
We look forward to hearing from you.
So we will hand it over to you.
Uh, but yeah,
bear in mind there may be many questions from members, so,
uh, yeah, we'll hand it over for your opening remarks.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, uh, Dan Neba and Porter Targa,
and I've got Corey Lipinski here with me as well.
So look, um, thank you. I'll take our submission as read.
I, I, I guess just at a, at a high level, um,
obviously we are supportive of the introduction
and of the amendments to the Fast Track Approvals Act.
Um, that'll speed up the process and create certainty
and clarify the fast track system.
Uh, Porter Toga has two projects listed, uh,
under the fast track process, one being a, a, a dredging
or renewal, and one being the stellar passage development
for, for, for for wolf extensions.
And generally we're supportive
of the proposed changes under the bill, particularly those
that provide clarity on how the different aspects
of the process will work.
Um, specifically the change
to the Stellar Passage development description, um,
statutory timeframes and further information requests.
I guess, um, one thing I just did wanna touch on,
and it's probably a question, is in relation
to transitional provisions.
Um, our submission is
that any application in the system
should benefit from the changes.
I'm just quite keen to understand how those, um,
transitional, transitional provisions might work.
So I'm happy to leave it there and, um, take any questions.
Thank you. Uh, look, we've got Cameron Luxton, uh,
who I believe is local to, uh, with the first question.
Yeah, thank you Chair. Uh, thank you Dan.
I, the question actually, I was going to ask of you,
you just asked of the panel,
but let me put it in a different way.
Um, you've put in your submission, uh, changing
the schedule two designation for the Mount Wolves to, uh,
wharf to Whas.
I think that shows a level
of nervousness about the way this process has gone.
Um, what sort of advice have you received about, uh,
existing applications being moved into this new process?
And are you, what are you, uh, have you had any advice that,
um, the minister having the ability to, uh, amend
or, uh, look at applications would be able to, you know,
hazard to use the word,
but retrospectively look at your consent, especially
for the stellar passage, uh, upgrade.
Thanks, Cameron. Look, we, we,
we actually haven't had any advice on it as, uh, as a yet.
We, we are just wanting to understand, um,
how they're going to be dealt with.
But it would be our submission and our hope
and expectation that, um, any, uh,
well applications such as ours that are already in what
that are already listed, um, would benefit from the changes
that are proposed, um, and will be enacted shortly.
Okay. If there's more questions the end, I'll go again,
uh, chair, but I
Just, I'll just hand it over to Rachel, uh,
and then we will come back to you, Cameron.
Yeah, thank you. It might be useful, um, to take us
through what happened with the Esella passage
because that's been given as a reason
for needing this legislation to go through so quickly.
And my question with that is how it relates to schedule two
of the Fast Track Approvals Act
and uh, obviously that came through
with no select committee process
and no public process at all.
And was that done too quickly?
Um, well, I I don't think it was done too quickly and,
and actual fact, um,
and I think it's been quite public about how it came about.
Uh, we made a, an application to be included on the list.
Our application was very clear, it was
for the Stellar Passage Project,
and the Stellar Passage project is very clear.
It includes both the eastern
and western sides of the harbor being the Sulf Point Wharf
and the Mount Nui wharfs.
And, and, uh, it's been acknowledged quite publicly
that there was a drafting error
and the Mount Nui wolves was, was left out, which,
which doesn't make any sense in this, but
because the project that was applied
for the description was very clear, um,
and, and, and included both.
So we, we just saw that as a correction of
what was originally intended.
Okay. So my interpretation of that is
that speed is of an issue.
If it was a drafting error, there was no ability,
no mechanism to pick up that drafting error error
because it was introduced in the committee stage
of the bill, which means
that's the only change that can happen then.
Whereas if it had been introduced earlier, had gone
through a select committee process,
presumably you would've looked at it
and said, hang on, this doesn't match with
what we applied for.
Yeah, well, yeah, and, and,
and look, we, we we're not privy to the detail.
I guess from our point of view.
Um, we, we are just pleased that it, um, it is intended
that it be corrected and what was always
to be what was always intended.
Mm-hmm. Look, thank you.
I might just jump in there and ask a question
'cause I did recently visit the Port of toga
and, you know, obviously knowing the, the amount of exports
and, uh, containers that go through the port there,
you know, with, with the stellar passage
and obviously the expansion of that wharf,
what, what would that mean?
Like, what would that mean in terms of the, the ability
as the port to operate
and, uh, provide the, the trade, uh, avenue that we need?
So, so, so simply
what it means is it means we can complete the development
of the wharf that was planned 30 years ago.
So it's nothing new where it's simply a comp a completion
of a planned project.
Um, at the moment we are significantly constrained
and the constraint is, is key length,
and giving us the ability to
expand the sulfur point wharfs to the South as,
as we're applying for is, is, is really critical for
New Zealand exports
and imports in terms of having
sufficient infrastructure there to cater
for the needs of New Zealanders.
So it's, it's, it's pretty critical
and without it, um, we are gonna be facing, um,
massive congestion issues.
It's not just an issue for the Port of Tara where it's, um,
it's all the major exporters, New Zealand dairy, kiwi fruit,
forestry, and, and, and importers as well.
So it's, it's critical
Without it does it, uh, risk having to turn ships away.
That's happening at the moment.
So yes, it's a real risk
and we're turning services away at the moment.
Thank you. Look, we will go back to Cameron Luxton.
We do have time for a couple more questions.
Oh, thank you, chair.
Um, yeah, so the cornerstone of New Zealand's, uh,
port infrastructure is what's happening in port of to,
and this has been a long time, uh, issue,
the stellar passage and dredging, um, consents.
I'm just interested in your, as, uh, your, the people
who can and can't have a say, uh,
or a challenge, uh, will be limited.
Uh, it says in your, uh, submission here, um, the people
who will exclude, uh, the bill will limit the appeal rights
to those persons who must be invited,
uh, to provide comments.
And who did. So does your interpretation of that mean
that if someone wasn't, or a group wasn't invited
and then didn't, they wouldn't be able to appeal
and if they did, they would be able to appeal?
Yeah, I'll take this one. Yes.
That's our understanding that groups that are invited
to comment and
that did provide a comment would be able to appeal.
And any groups that, um, weren't invited
or were invited
but didn't provide comments,
would not be able to appeal. And,
And how important is that to the two fast track consents
that Port of Total currently has?
Sorry, if you rephrase that question, how important is it
that people can't appeal or,
Well, no, how, how important is it that you know, who you,
who is being invited to, uh, provide comment and who did
and how much is it, you know, uh, groups coming out
of the woodwork at a later stage
of the consent application process that gets,
It's immensely important to the port?
Um, so the pro, the people that are in the groups
that are party to the process itself, we obviously through
that panel conveners
or through the panel's process, once we get to that stage,
we'll be able to understand that issues
that they're raising and work through it.
It's where those parties that come out of the woodworks
and raise issues that could have been addressed through
that panel process, that's when the issues start
and that's when a lot of the delays
and Frustrat frustration can arise from.
Yep. It's like amending the scope of work
and that's what makes the cost blow out.
Thank you, Judy. Thank
You. Just one last question
from Rachel, Brooke.
Yeah, just going back to the timing
of the stellar passage.
So I am interested to know how long you think
it would've taken you to read, uh, the schedule
to work out that something was wrong
and I'm assuming it might've been a week would be ample time
for you to do that, noting that this thing
that you were calling a drafting error error occurred in
December last year.
So, so my point is a little bit
of time spent in December last year might have saved a whole
lot of this year's time.
Yes, I think you're right.
It probably would've taken about a week.
And I think there's also a provision in the bill now which
proposes that other listed projects can have their
descriptions changed by order and council.
So I think that's a good, we Port position is,
that's quite a good change as well.
Thank you. And we'll just do one last grant, McCullum.
Yeah. Just very quickly actually, could you get a,
remind us how long Porter Taron has been engaged in the RMA
process to get the stellar passage approved, please?
Um, w we, we,
we started the original consultation on this, um, back in,
back in 2016.
So terms
of the process, six years into it. Yeah.
Yeah. Who, who repealed the RMA?
That's another good question. Right.
I think we will move on. Thank, we have met time.
You can answer Grant. Uh, I, I, we will move on.
We've met time. We, we appreciate your submission today
and thank you for answering all our questions.
Um, thank you.
Thank you, thank you. So we will now move
to the Far North District Council and we can see you there.
Hey Madam Chair,
just checking. You can hear me as well? Yes,
We can hear you. Welcome to
this select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Hey,
uh, just sending, um, to you all ESTEEM members
of the Environment Select Committee, uh, Madam Chair
as Mayor of the far north, um, I appreciate the time
that I have to, uh,
give feedback on the proposed amendments to this on behalf
of the Far North District Council.
Um, now in a very tight turnaround,
our staff have, uh, given consideration to the amendments
that are being proposed here
and, um, have given some, uh, meaningful feedback on what
that means for us here in the far north in
the FAR District Council.
Um, just highlighting
that we do support the greater certainty
for grocery retailers regarding their qualification
to use Fast Track that is being proposed.
Uh, here in the far north,
75,000 people spread over 7,500 square kilometers
of area in a district that is four hours long
and two hours wide with six major supermarkets in
KA and q.
Uh, we still have, uh, 214 other settlements
that do not have major, um, supermarkets.
And we definitely need some competition up here for some
of our towns, uh, where we do have monopolies in place
that is putting cost pressures on our people up here,
especially up in the KU area, uh, the far, far north, uh,
where we do only have one major supermarket.
And of course, because it is the end of the road
to get there, uh, cost price is reflected
and is, um, is hurting our people.
So we support those provisions.
Uh, we have highlighted those some concerns across some
of the others and we've broken those down across, uh, seven,
um, major concerns within the amendments.
Um, one of those is on infrastructure adequacy,
uh, conditions.
And you'll see here that, uh, our staff have highlighted
how, um, we would like to make sure that, you know,
should something go through fast track
that our panel is going to be able to impose prerequisite,
uh, infrastructure conditions on those projects to make sure
that we, at the end
of the day here in the far north aren't left
with picking up the bill on providing the surrounding
support infrastructure that these would potentially take.
Now one of the fast track proposals for Yip Bay,
for a Marina as an example, um, is gone through
to the next stages there.
Now this is going to be, if, if it was Suce successful going
to be put in an area of the Bay of Violence that has no
existing infrastructure whatsoever.
So that would, um, how would that connect
with our current local rating network, uh,
and all of the associated pieces of infrastructure.
So definitely wanting to make sure that it's, uh,
given not a, maybe, especially for us up here
where we actually don't have currently have a development
contributions policy in effect.
Now we've been working hard as the final district council
to bring that back in, that will come in, come in in,
um, may next year.
But there are concerns there about how we clip the ticket
to make sure that developers are contributing to, uh,
the cost pressures
that we currently are putting across general rate payers.
Uh, the second one, there is changes
to the mandatory consultation requirements
and a change from consult to inform.
Now, this is one that we highlighted, uh,
highlighted last time I spoke
to select committee on on the Fast tracks Bill.
We here in the far north have got, um, man agreement with
and MOU relationship agreements with Tega
or ua, Tega, UA
and Tega, sorry, with a number
of Iwi Hapu environmental management plans, um,
that we have as well.
But this will put undue pressure on us to, um,
our people are gonna have no avenue to be heard.
We also highlighted the first time we made a submission
to this bill, the concerns we have over the different
ranking of settled and unsettled iwi
themselves are unsettled.
So, uh, the hapu of n kahu up here
and it makes second class citizens of UA on the ground
and their ability to be able to respond
accordingly, um, with the best interests
of intergenerational, um, wellbeing
for our people on the ground here.
So, just cons, highlighting concerns there.
And from what I've seen already on the ground
with fast tracks is when our people have no one else to turn
to because there isn't an avenue with you
who are making these rules down in Wellington, they turn
to us and they put pressure on our system, which is, is, um,
under pressure already to try and respond accordingly.
And we are local government, we are on the ground
and we have to, um, we have to listen to them,
but that's putting pressure on us.
That should fairly sit with you.
And if you have, um, scope within the legislation
to make decent legislation that makes sense,
rather than trying to put everyone in a quiet corner, then
that will be helpful for me to do my job on the ground
and actually getting stuff done here in the final.
Um, our staff have also highlighted concerns
around the restricting a panel's discretion
to invite additional parties.
Um, the concern I have here is that it would mean that
local government, us here, the final District council,
is going to have to have a really good submission
because we actually do get to give comment,
but when our turnaround time is then being restricted from
20 days to 15 days, how are we supposed
to meaningfully engage with our people
and be the, uh, only ones that get to kind
of have a stronger say than anyone else?
That makes it a little bit unfair in that space.
Um, talked about those
and then just generally highlighting the concerns
around the increased ministerial powers.
I'll, um, leave some time for any specific questions,
but, uh, it's all there in my written submission
that has been prepared by our wonderful staff
with the tight turnarounds.
Back to you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, thank you for that submission.
Look, Celia, Wade Brown has a question for you,
Um, your worship.
Uh, nice to see you. Um, I had two questions about time.
They're both quite quick.
Um, the first was how did your council manage
to find the time to make a submission?
Um, when you only had 10
or potentially 11 days to submit, did you, were you able
to go out to all of the counselors for their consideration
or did you have to go just to a staff submission
that got a rubber stamp,
Uh, staff submission with rubber stamp?
Now, just outside of the camera view,
there's actually a whip I've got next to my desk.
We've been whipping our staff to get them to have
to do these tight turnarounds.
It's not ideal. It means that we will retrospectively
as a council receive the submission, but
unless, um, we want to have a kind
of political view on it,
this is a staff submission based on our organization's
understanding of what this will mean
for us as an organization.
Thank you for that clarification.
The other question on time was that if you
as a council have to, um, submit and it,
and it might, I understand
that it will not necessarily be the whole elected council,
but, um, it, if you end up being the ones that have to say
what, um, make comments on everything from archeological
to environmental, um,
if they're not already in the submission,
if you think they've been missed out, are you going
to be a bit of the meat and the sandwich, um,
with other people not happy you for, you know,
maybe you just didn't know something
that a specialist group in the area, whether it's Hapu
or whether it's Forest and Bird, they might have known?
Oh, absolutely. We are going to have, um,
gaps Law in our submissions.
Um, for YP Bay, for example, we met,
we had a deputation from a number
of community groups in Hapu who came,
which then informed ours.
But we are not always, especially in the timelines we work
in, in, in council,
and we've gotta, um, follow the local government official
information and meetings act for statutory timelines around
how we can meet and formally make decisions.
This does put undue pressure on us
to be the be all end all our district plan, which is,
which would be your starting point, is 21 years old.
We're about to adopt a new district plan next year.
But even then in COVID, we as the council cut the funding
to meaningfully review Wahi tap in our area.
'cause we just had to cut the money to keep, uh, uh,
low rates rise for our, um,
when we were going through COVID.
So that is still going to be out of date.
It means there will be gaps in our submissions.
Thank you. Thank you.
Look, I'm gonna give the next question to our Northland MP
who will be familiar to you to grant McCullum
Ki How are you mate?
Hey, Good, good, good.
Hey, you've highlighted the supermarket issue up, um,
and obviously the, you know, the price of, uh,
food is a, is an important thing.
Do you really, you think that that could really help
with the competition side of it and maybe and,
and bring genuine competition
and some maybe some more competitive pricing?
Oh, absolutely. And this is not me wanting to, um,
point out any specific supermarket.
Yeah, I understand Really good relationships
with the owners or managers of these
and the incredible employers in our district.
But competition will bring pricing down.
Our largest town in the far, far north mm-hmm.
Only has a single supermarket at this time.
And so if it's easier to be able to, um, welcome
and we've been working as a council to try, uh,
do feasibility studies.
Feasibility studies show
that the town can support another major supermarket.
But, um, when all of the red tape is in the way for someone
to actually come up, if Fast Track can be used
as an opportunity to entice further major supermarket
retailers to set up shop in the funnel, then uh,
we will definitely be in favor of that.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much. We have met time.
We have other submitters waiting,
but we do really appreciate your submission today
and your insights into the far north.
Uh, really appreciate it.
Hey qui, thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we will now move on
to our next submitter, Richard Reeve.
Good afternoon, Richard.
Hi. Hello. I hope you can hear me. Um,
Yes, we can hear you.
Uh, you have five minutes with us today,
so we will hand it over to you
for your submission. Thank you.
Great, thank you. I won't repeat
what I've actually submitted in writing.
Um, I've just gotta summarize it to the effect
that sometimes the longer way round is the
shortest way home.
Now what I mean by that is that the purpose of the act is
to facilitate the delivery of infrastructure
and development projects with significant regional
or national benefits.
The word that I would like to emphasize here is benefits.
Benefits in my submission has to be considered in the net,
which implies that the panel have
to undertake a thorough investigative process.
Now, my submission was on clauses 33, sub clause four
and clause 99 of the amendment bill
and my respectful submission,
those amendments proposed our anti-democratic
counterproductive and practical.
And I would even argue going almost so far
as unconstitutional,
I'd talk about specifically the impracticality of things.
Now, the situation under clause 33 4 is
that the panel is constrained from seeking written feedback
on substantive proposals, uh, from the general public
to matters which have not previously been addressed,
of course, by local authorities
or by administering agencies In countless number
of circumstances, the expertise of the general public, um,
is sufficiently diverse in its nature that it's not gonna be
adequately, um, encapsulated in the submission
of these organizations at all.
And yet because of the weasel word matter in clause 33, 4,
there's every possibility that people outside
of those organizations will miss the opportunity
or not have the opportunity to give written feedback.
And I'm thinking about ecologists, um,
from the universities, from consultants
who are independent about the applicant
or those organizations.
If we can't seek to promote robust outcomes,
um, in the course of actually facilitating the purpose
of the act, then in my submission we're just opening
ourselves up to failings
that need not necessarily take place.
And so I do not support clause 33 4
or clause 99, which of course purports to limit the, uh,
right of appeal on this latter clause.
I would state that irrespective of whether appeals on law
are limited by the new clause 99, further just
to the organization's invite under section 53 2,
that in any case there is a constitutional role
of the court, um,
to undertake its review function of legislation.
Its interpretation and application.
And again, I go back to the maximize stated
before that sometimes the longer way round it's the shortest
way home in that denial
of an appeal does not necessarily mean
that a decision won't be judicially reviewed.
Um, the final thing I'd like to say in connection with this,
and I can't cover the details here, is that it seems to me
that these amendments fly in the face
of the panel convener's practice
and procedure guidance dated 22 July, 2025, which appears
to, uh, support a liberal application of the discretion
to invite under section 53 3.
Um, and there are various potential
organizations listed there.
Um, I don't really understand
why these amendments are being pushed through in light
of the panel convener's guidance,
but it does not seem to be consistent with the advice.
On that note, I'll stop there.
If there's any questions, I'm happy to ask answer
Them. Look, thank you
Richard. We do have a question
from Rachel Brooking.
Yes, thank you Richard.
And thank you for the describing, um, the importance
of ecological evidence.
As an example we heard earlier from New Zealand Minerals
that they think, uh, the panel should include
for mining projects.
A person who knows about mining as one
of the three panelists.
Uh, what, what do you think about that idea?
I think that the panel needs to have a range of expertise,
of course, which is adequate of the task at hand.
Now that includes certainly, uh, individuals
who are concerned not with the purported benefits of,
you know, mineral extraction per se,
but also the sanctity of sanctity
that safeguarding the natural environment.
So personally, I would say that the,
uh, individuals from a mining background are likely
to have an agenda in place, which is, um,
to push mining projects forwards
that could potentially be balanced by individuals who,
as I say, have sort of like a, an interest in, in, uh,
safeguarding the integrity of the environment.
And you may find a balance there.
Um, I can't say that
that people from the mining background can be excluded per
se, but as I say, I think there needs
to be a balancing. Mm-hmm.
Look, thank you very much Richard
for your submission today.
We appreciate your time.
Pleasure. Thank you. Thank you.
So we'll now move through
to our next submitter, Mary Hutchinson.
Good afternoon Mary.
We can see you and we can hear you there.
So welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have just five minutes with us,
so we will hand it over to you.
Kia. Kia, sorry to jump in.
Um, I'm very nervous.
Uh, go Mary Hutchinson ua, uh, from,
uh, so in my
submission I had two lines.
One is I oppose this legislation
and the second line is that I would like to see the Fast
Track Act repealed
and replaced by something that
properly protects our unique paol.
So I have three points to make in addition to that,
the first is I see both the already in place act
and this amendment as being recolonization
of Arturo New Zealand.
And there is very little honor given, if any,
to our founding document, Ang,
which is the document which enables me to live here
and have a home being of European ancestry.
Second point is that, um,
science is pushed to one side, um,
including climate science by the rushed nature
of when, uh, the panel considers,
uh, an application, uh, 60 days,
I understand is not long enough
to assess particularly large sta scale projects.
So this is an anti-science piece of proposed legislation.
And thirdly, it's anti-democratic.
And our democracy here in Artero New Zealand is orally
severely uh, eroded.
And this act and its amendment
will further erode democracy.
It will not allow local people to make representations,
be they iwi, be they property owners.
And that is unacceptable to me as
a normally proud Kiwi.
I'm open for questions.
Thank you very much, Mary, for your submission.
Uh, look, LAN farm has got a question for you,
Qua Mary, thank you so much for your submission
and your time to,
even though you're nervous do this very
clear, uh, submission.
So thank you for that. Um, my question was, uh,
what prompted you to make this submission
and have you submitted on other legislation, uh,
in, in, in the past?
Or where does this sit in terms of, I guess, your spectrum
of what kinds of legislation or,
or instances where you've used your voice or not?
Uh, I have submitted a lot.
Um, but there's been so much urgency,
which is an under undermining of democracy,
that it's very hard for a lay person to keep up
with the amount of legislation
and the fact that it's pushed through under urgency.
An example of that is the very fact there was only three
working days for me to nominate a slot to speak to you.
Uh, and fortunately I'm a retired person
and for someone who was working, I mean, it's just as exclu,
it's exclusively excl excluding
so many people, so many views.
So yes, so our nature, um,
the created order is a passion of mine.
It has been since I was a child when I, uh, fiddled
around in the first of my five hour, uh,
which was in North Canterbury.
And it's remained,
even though it hasn't been my professional focus,
I'm now an artist and, uh, I have
difficulty recalling how many submissions I have made.
I'll be honest and say they've got shorter
and shorter as has my patients
with this coalition government
Look. Thank you.
Does answer your Question. Mary, thank, thank you
for your submission today
and, um, letting us know your views.
Uh, so we appreciate your time
and uh, yeah, we will call time on that there. Thank you.
Okay, Kia. So we will now
move on to our final submitter for the day
to Du Kaka.
Kiara, good to see you again.
Oh, Kiara, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us.
Uh, take your submission as read,
but we will hand it over to you for your opening remarks.
Yeah, KDA, um, chair and uh, panel members.
Thank you again for, um, having us here this time in my head
of, uh, chair of, uh, the regional sector.
And we've got, uh, te Kaka submission. Uh, we have, uh, Dr.
Stephanie Rickter with me, uh, Nigel Cory
and Al Cross, who will speak
to different elements of our submission.
But I firstly just wanted to say thanks.
Um, te Uru Kaka is the regional
and unitary council's collective voice representing
New Zealand 16 regional and unitary authorities.
Uh, as you will all know,
regional council is a critical partner in the resource
management, uh, system at the moment.
Uh, but we do share ambitions for a more productive economy,
both now and for our future.
Uh, and I really wanna make that point really clear
that we are partnering to try
and make sure that New Zealand has a thriving economy
and a thriving environment.
Uh, and we, we do wanna see those things work hand in glove,
uh, because that is around the sustainable future
for New Zealand, not just now,
but also into a hundred years in the future.
And we want strong enduring industries
and that's why this process really matters to us.
Uh, no one likes working with the current system.
We can admit that. Uh,
but we are all looking forward to
what the new legislation does look like
and improving the way that we work together,
and that we work with a new one lens on
how we deliver good outcomes for New Zealand.
Um, we want to play a critical role in that adding value
that is both balanced and well functioning.
And the fast track system that we want to see is a fast, um,
is a balance and well functioning one
and consents that can be successfully
implemented on the ground.
And that's really critical part, making sure
that the consents can work on the ground for people.
The current fast track settings, in our opinion, uh,
provide a rapid process.
They do support good engagement at the front end, uh,
ahead of the lodgement.
And the bill that you are proposing now removes that, uh,
good participation, consultation requirements,
and decision making time must be retained.
We can't emphasize it enough that the front end
taking the time, we'll see good outcomes at the end.
I'll pass it over to Nigel, who will take, uh, take us
through the next section of the submission.
Yeah, thank you. Um, I unfortunately don't seem
to be getting my camera working, um,
but you can hear me, I'm hoping.
Yes. Yeah, like I beg your pardon.
I dunno what's going on there,
but look, thank you very much.
Look, I just wanna briefly touch on early participation.
Um, uh, Teka strongly believes that early
participation is meaningful
and it allows Lodgements, uh, to go quickly and effectively
and trying to reduce the early participation
around consultational lodgement.
Uh, and the associated constrained notification process
can lead to risks running complete, uh,
advice being delivered, inconsistent costs being applied,
and overall possibly poor outcomes for communities.
So we believe that the sector brings valuable experience
and knowledge to, uh, the early discussions
around fast track processes.
Uh, and that has a strong benefit, helping upfront issues
to be resolved, uh, reducing risk of dispute
and improving outcomes.
Um, councils are also responsible picking up the monitoring
of consents once granted.
And the input into this process up the front end can make it
far more streamlined to get better quality, uh,
consent conditions, uh, allow the fast track system
to work effectively and the outcomes from the decisions
to be implementable
and implemented effectively with council, uh,
as the consent oversight.
So essentially doing this work upfront without, uh,
without overly short timeframes as advantageous
to outcomes both for the fast track applicant
and for the environment and council participation.
And a similar point as we would like to make around the, um,
retaining time for expert panels to make quality decisions.
Any further restriction around the ability for, uh, for, um,
panels to make decisions can lead to some similar outcomes
that can be well, um, well served by just having
sufficient time for panels to take all the information,
presented them into account
and come with a robust decision making,
including consent conditions
so they can be implemented effectively.
Uh, so thank you for that.
And again, apologies about my camera
And I'll pick up from, I'll pick up from here.
Uh, just, uh, with regard to upholding te
Ity in the Iwi Hapu participation.
So in the first instance, te Kaka
and our member councils are clear on the importance of iwi
and hapu participation
and resource management decision making.
It's absolutely core and the effective iwi
and hapu participation provides certainty for applicants
and it's essential for enduring consent outcomes.
And replacing the current consultation requirements
with a notification clause won't guarantee UA participation.
It will constrain engagement through shortened timeframes
and ultimately it might result in lower quality
applications and decisions.
The requirement to provide draft reports on treaty
settlements and other obligations
to relevant ministers should be retained
to promote early engagement opportunities
and to uphold obligations, particularly
with regard to treaty settlements.
And then lastly, I'll just speak to a range of matters.
Our submission is to Kaka also makes key points on retaining
fair and reasonable cost recovery provisions,
the independence of panels and appeal rights.
And we think the current settings are about right
across these elements.
Outcomes will not be diminished by retaining them.
And finally, we note ambiguous wording around provisions,
governing conditions on requirements
to provide adequate infrastructure.
Councils and rate payers must not be unfairly obligated
to undertake or fund necessary infrastructure work.
There should not be cross subsidy,
so the relevant provisions should reflect
what was actually intended.
That completes our submission.
We're happy to take questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that submission.
Look, we've got the first question from Celia Wade Bra.
Hello Coto. And fortunately I know what Nigel looks like,
so a blank screen doesn't worry me.
Um, but nice to have your input
and it is, I would wondered what you thought about
when the Fast Track, the original Fast Track
Act changed the decision making from three ministers
to a panel.
There was a general sort of sigh of relief.
Is this an area
that you are concerned has been very much undermined by,
um, having a very directive approach from ministers
that potentially opens up at least to the questions
of pressure and influence?
I mean, that's probably quite a political
question, so I'll answer it.
Um, yes, there is a concern with that
and there is a concern, uh, that both goes both ways in,
in my opinion here, there is a risk
to the ministers as well.
Um, and that's, and that's very real and unrealized,
and I don't think it's been talked about enough, uh,
that if we get this wrong
and if we get this wrong at the front end, the risk
to the ministers at the back end around judicial reviews
or other legal proceedings or other things are higher.
Uh, and we don't want to see any government being, uh,
hamstrung and being able to deliver for New Zealanders.
So that's a risk that I'd like to,
to leave on the table there.
Uh, just in regards to what you're saying. I, I agree.
Uh, but there's that other, other risk as well.
Thank you. Look, we'll now go to Rachel Brooking.
Uh, thank you. Just right at the end
before questions, you were talking about the importance
of those pre-application, uh, treaty settlement reports.
Can you, um, just give us some color about
what they might contain and how they're useful?
Yeah, I think what, what you're talking about there is
that there's information that can be brought
to bear early on so
that an application can be fully informed, uh,
rather than it being slowed down or indeed going to court.
It could be anything from wahi tapu sites to ING Kai.
Uh, there are a number of reasons why, uh,
HAPU II would be involved
and those cultural reports, if you wish to call them,
that could be quite instrumental in creating a much
more streamlined approach.
And have, have you seen them work? Have you Yes, we,
I'm spoken from a Canterbury Regional Council perspective,
but there are other examples from across Te Kaga.
That's correct. Thank you.
Thank you. And Lan Farm,
Tina Koto, thank you so much
for your comprehensive submission.
My question was around, um,
particularly regional council's role in appointing
panel members to make decisions under the RMA.
So you'd probably be quite familiar with
what the fast track conveners are undertaking,
and we've heard some really clear concerns throughout the
submission process about essentially a chilling effect
and potential for reputational damage
or basically, um, panel members just not wanting
to sit on panels to make these decisions.
What would be the implications for that
and what have, have regional councils learned from your own
lessons about like upholding the integrity
of these processes so
that you actually get good decision makers in the first
instance so that they ideally can make the best decisions?
Must be Nigel, or, Sorry,
I'm checking in.
Who's gonna answer? Uh, Nigel? No,
Thank you Lan for the question.
Well, I think getting the best qualified commissioners
or hearings panel who can bring an objective perspective
to the decisions in front of them can take on the myriad of
advice and expert opinion that they will get in the process
and be able to decipher that adequately
to make the most robust decisions that aligns
with the principles
of having a fast track provision in there.
And the fact that a application has got through the,
into the fast track process,
but still making sure that there's enduring outcomes
that have a balance of delivering the projects
and the reason it's through a fast back process,
but also actually balancing the environmental, economic
and social outcomes
and the cultural outcomes at the back end of that.
So objectivity
and high quality decision makers that are impartial
to the process can see the merits
of a application on its own merits
and balance that, uh,
I think always remains the most important thing
of pulling the panel together, whether it's
through the fast track or through a council process.
And I just, I just wanted
to add one last thing there from a, um, uh, from a,
from a political point of view
and also from an outcomes point of view, that truly effect
that you were talking about will most likely lead to
outcomes not being delivered.
And we all wanna see outcomes in this country, um,
and we all wanna see things done.
And the current process that could end up having happening
is that we don't see those outcomes and that's a real risk
Look. Thank you very
much. I think you're right.
We all wanna see outcomes in this country,
so we will leave it there.
Uh, thank you for your submission that the final submission
of our public hearings today.
Thank you. So, uh, it's been a big day,
but we appreciate your time, so thank you. Thank
You very much. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
And uh, grant, you've been quiet,
Unusual.
I know, I was expecting that. Thank you so much
Enthralled with your submission, Dion.
I love it. Good work. Thanks. Thanks team.
Thank you. Uh, Thank, thank you everyone.
That brings us to the end of our, uh,
public hearings for today.
So we will now move into private session.
How do we do that? Can we do.